Chapter One

Lower Organisms

Virus, Bacteria, Fungi, Algae, Amoeba etc. are called lower organisms. Among
them Virus, Bacteria and Amoeba are not visible without the help of a
microscope. These are microorganisms . ew fungi and algae can be seen with
bare eyes but other need microscopic support. These lower organisms or
microorganisms cause disease of man, domestic animals, birds and plants. These
organisms also have beneficial effects on environment.

After studying this chapter, we will be able —

> to explain the characteristics of micro organisms.
to classify microorganisms,

to explain the characteristics of Virus, Bacteria and Amoeba.

¥Wv WwW

to explain the characteristics of Algae and Fungi, their benefit and
detrimental effects.

to explain how to resist the fungal and infections.

vy Wv

to be self conscious and make others conscious about fungal infections.

> to explain the risks and way out from human health hazards created by
Virus, Bacteria and Entamoeba.

> Tobe self conscious and also make other conscious to resist these health

hazards.

Forma- 1, Science, Class-7
Z Science

Lesson 1-2 : Microbial World

We can see many organisms around us. Besides these organisms, there are
numerous invisible organisms which cannot be seen by bare eyes. Most of
them do not have well-organized nucleus in their cells. These are known as
micro-organisms. In early stages, life has been initiated from these micro-
organisms. For this reason, micro-organisms are termed as procaryotic or
primitive organism,

In Class Six, you have seen five kingdom of classification of the living world
proposed by Whittaker and Margulies, On this classifacation micro organisms
are placed under kingdom Monera, Ptotista and Fungi, At present, microbiologists
classify the microbial world into three kingdoms.

Microbial
World

i
i j |

Kingdom-1:] |Kingdom-2:} |Kingdom - 3:
Akaryota Prokaryota Eukaryota

Kingdom-—-L: Akaryota or Acellular: These organisms are so small that they
cannot be seen even under a light microscope. An electron microscope is needed
to see them, such as —Virus.

Kingdom — 2: Prokaryota or Primitive celled: Members of this kingdom do
not have well-organized nucleus, Cell without organized nucleus is termed
primitive cell, such as Bacteria.

Kingdom — 3: Eukaryota or True celled: Microbes having true cells are
called Eukaryota. Algae, Fungi and Protozoa are Eukaryotic microbes.

New Words: Akaryota, Prokaryota, Eukaryota, Microbes, Virus,

Lesson — 3, 4: Virus and Bacteria

Virus, Ricketsia, Fungi, Bacteria, Algae, and Protozoa Head (Protein)
etc. are presentin our environment in innumerable in numbers. DNA

Most of them are beneficial. Of course, some of them are
responsible for producing diseases in human body. Now

4 ; Fi Collar
we will know about few microorganisms.
Tail
Virus- Virus cannot be seen without electronic microscope.
Tail Fibre

These are the simplest organisms. In virus cell wall, plasma

membrane, organized nucleus, cytoplasm ete. are absent, — Pig-b! Te Virus Particle

2025
2025

Lower organisms 3

So, virus body is also called acellular. They are composed of only protein
coating and nucleic acid (DNA or RNA). If nucleic acid gets out of protein
coating, they lose all properties of life. When the protein coating and neuclic
acid are gathered in another organism, they regain the properties of life. That is,
they do not show any properties of life without living host or outside of living
host. For that, viruses are the true parasites.

Bacteriophage is a common virus among all viruses. The figure gives the idea of
their structure.

Virus may be round, rod shaped, tadpole like or bread shaped. Virus causes Pox,
Measles, Sneezing. Influenza etc. in human body. Trungro of rice and mosaic
diseases of tobacco caused by Virus.

Benefits of Viruses : Vaccines for various diseases such as smallpox, polio, and
plague are made from viruses. Viruses are used in genetic engineering.

Harmfull Effects of viruses : Viruses cause diseases like covid-19, poxes,
measles, rabies and AIDS ete in the human body. Viruses Causes various
diseases in plant such as mosaic disease of tobacco, tungro disease of rice etc.

Bacteria: We have learnt about bacteria in the previous

class. Now we need to have a broader look. Bacteria is i
non-green, unicellular microscopic organisms with

primitive nucleus. The scientist, Antony von Leuen :
Hoek found this for the first time. Bacteria cell may be .

rod shaped, rounded, comma shaped or spiral. Bacteria

can be classified according to their shape as follows- Fig- 1.2: Cocens

a. Coccus: Rounded shaped bacteria cell are

named as coccus. They remain single or in
groups. Such as Pneumonia causing (fs

Bacteria.

b, Bacillus: These are elongated rod shaped Cnt?
bacteria. Tetanus, Blood Dysentery ete are -, ee,
caused by Bacillus.

c. Comma: Shaped like bend rod. Such as Fig- 1.3: Bacillus

Bacteria causing Human Cholera.
d. Spirilum: Spiral Bacteria. P f
Benefits of Bacteria : i ip gi
* Helps in decomposition of dead bodies and *\ e eo
organic wastes. ne) a
e Only bacteria fixes nitrogen directly in the soil.
* Helps in removing jute fibres. Fig- 1.4: Comma
A Science

* Used in preparation of curds,

« Preparation of life saving Antibiotics from bacteria,

« Bacteria is the main basis of Genetic
engineering. Becteria is used in some cases
in order to identity the desired characteristics Spirilum
of organisms. It is also used in genetic changes.

Fig- 1.5: S$pimlum

Harmful effect of Bacteria : Bacteria cause diseases like tuberculosis, cholera,
typhoid, dysentery etc. in the human body. They cause food and fruit root rot.
They Causes various plant diseases like leaf blight of rice, canker of tomato etc.

Lesson 5-6: Algae, Fungi and Amoeba

Fungi: Fungi are non-green thallophytic plants. They cannot take part in
photosynthesis because they do not have chlorophyll. So. they are heterophyte
or saprophytic. Heterophytic fungi grow on slate, rotten food staffs, fruits,
vegetables, wet bread or leather, cow dung ete. Saprophytic fungi grow on dead
organisms or on soi full of humus.

Economic Importance of Fungi:

We get many valuable medicines including Penicillin from Fungi. Fungi named
Yeasts are used for preparing bread. Yeasts are used in vitamin tablets as they
are very rich in vitamins. Now a days. a kind of mushroom named Agaricus is
used as fancy food. At present Agaricus is cultivated in many countries includ-
ing ours. Fungi have important role in purifying waste products and mix them
with soil.

Fungi are responsible for many diseases of man, animal, bird and plants. Ring
worm, inflammation of the trachea (respiratory system) and freckles are fungal
diseases. Disease like late blight of potatoes, black band disease of jute, red rot
of sugarcane etc. are caused by fimgal infection. They easily attack furniture
made of wood, bamboo, cane etc. and damage them enormously.

Prevention of fungal infection:

Fungal diseases are highly contagious. It means a person may get infected on
coming into contact with an infected person. The following measures should be

2025
2025

Lower organisms 5

taken to be safe from these diseases :
i. Avoid using things (clothes, combs, caps, sandals) of the infected
persons.
ii. Avoid mixing with deseased person.
ili, Spraying fungicides on infected plants or uprooting and burn them up.

Algae: Algae are chlorophillous and autophytic plants of the order Thallophyta.
They grow on soil, water and on other plants. Besides, green, red, brown etc.
coloured algae are also seen. The algae named "Spirogyra" grows in the most
water bodies.

Benefits of Algae : Elgin extracted from marine algae is used in preparing ice
cream. Marine algae are also good source of iodine and potassium. Algae are
used as food in fisheries.

Harmful Effects of Algae : Algae are responsible for causing various diseases of
human and plants. Abundance of algae in water bodies create shortage of
oxygen that may cause death of aquatic animal & fishes.

Amoeba: Amoeba, a member of ,, Food Vacuole

the kingdom Protista, is a =a | | Pgeudopodia
unicellular organism. Their 0 GRO WI 41> Plasma Gel
body is very small. They F 28 OO gee —> Plasma Sol
cannot be seen without a [8% <f275\_).° ee Nucleus
microscope. They can change Sa an No: x Oe sp Sepa. Eetoplesm

their body shape according to
their necessity. Small finger like
structure which is produced NS % Cocilraitile
from their body, is called Vacuole
pseudopodia. With the help of
these pseudopodia Amoeba
takes food and moves from one
place to another. The body bears some water vacuoles, food vacuoles and
contractile vacuoles. The body is surrounded by a thin transparent membrane.
It is called plasmalemma.

Water
Vacuole

Fig-1.6: Microscopie structure of amoeba

Amoeba grows in water, wet soil, rotten waste material, organic debris at the
bottom of the pond ete.
6 Science

Lesson 7: Entamoeba

There are two types of dysentery, such as - Amoebic and Bacillary. One type of
bacillus bacteria is responsible for causing bacillary dysentery. Amoebic dysen-
tery is caused by the infection of one kind of unicellular animal, Entamoeba.

Entamoeba: Entamoeba is a unicellular organism which belong to the kingdom
Protista. They cannot be seen with bare eyes. Its body has no definite shape
because they continuously change size and shape. Their body 1s transparent and
jelly like. In adverse environment sometimes they cover the body with hard and
round covering. This condmon is known as cyst.

es Fig-1.8: Multiple Fission of Amocha
red blood cells

Fig-1.7: Entamoeba
They live in as parasites in large intestines of man, monkeys, cats, dogs, pigs and
rats. Entomoeba for causing a kind of dysentery is responsible .
Entamoeba reproduces by cell division and sporulation processes. In sporulation
process, protoplasm of the cell divides into many parts and produce small
spores. In favourable condition, each spore grows into a new Entamoeba.

The patient bears the germs without any symtoms. It is very difficult to cure
amoebic dysentery completely. The disease is completely cured when a
competent doctor is consulted and taken proper medicines.

Lesson 8-9 : Role of Microbes in Creating Health Hazards

Bacteria may get entrance in different processes. Dirty hands may
act as suitable carrier for germs. Bacteria can enter into the mouth through

dirty hand. Bacterial spores may also be transported with the clothes that
we use.

2025
2025

Lower organisms fj

Bacterial spores may travel from one place to another with the dust in the air.
Bacteria may easily get transferred through shaking hands. Germs disperses
easily through stale and rotten foods. Cholera and Typhoid are bacterial diseases.
Once spread of diseases caused by virus, bacteria and Entamoeba was very high.
It was caused due to the shoriage of safe water. Defecation and urination hither
and thither create risk in public health. Animals feeding on these fecal matters
disperse the germs from one place to another. Besides, the rain water and tidal
water also spread the germs to distant places.

Work : Make a survey of your village to see how many houses have
sanitary latrines, Make a list of those houses and aware them who

have not. Write a report on the works you have done and submit it to
your teacher,

In many areas of our country, there is no sanitary latrine and the people use
fields or unhygienic latrines for defecation. Entamoeba infested fecal matters get
mixed with the soil. Handling that soil contaminates hands. Vegetables grown
in those soils are also contaminated. Vegetables sometimes contaminated with

Entamoeba germs. After normal cooking, Entamoeba germs are still alive,
Entamoeba is transmitted in these ways.

When infected with virus, sometimes it is cured normally within 2/4 days
without any medical help. But some diseases need long term treatment. Virus
of cough and cold spread through coughing, spitting and sneezing. Mosaic diseases
of plants are transmitted with simple contact. AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome) is still not curable. AIDS is transmitted when blood from infected
person is taken, taking drugs by those who are addicted, using same needle many
times while taking injectable medicines and involvement in immoral trafficking.
Mumps, Pox, Measles etc. are very painful diseases. These viral diseases are
transmitted through air and get into the respiratory tract,

Lesson 10: Prevention and Remedy of Health Hazards
Caused by Microbes

For prevention and remedy of the diseases caused by Virus, Bacteria, Fungi
and Entamoeba, a joint effort is needed to follow the rules of hygiene carefully.
8 Science

It should be kept in mind that a weak health runs the risk of being attacked
by diseases, So, everybody should take balanced diet regularly according to the
needs of body .

Work: Make a list of those classmates who have not cut nails and have not

brushed their tooth and make them aware about the importance of these health
activities.

Only meat and fish cannot meet the demand of the balanced food. Taking
vegetables and fruits along with these can fulfill the demand of balanced diet.
Vitamins and mineral salts are important for maintaining good health and
developing resistance against diseases. Next comes the use of sanitary latrine,
cleaning and washing hands and mouth following health rules. Having regular
nail cuts, brushing the tooth and taking bath using toilet soap are also very
important for the prevention of diseases. Not spitting on the road, using masks or
handkerchief while walking in dusty road and covering face with handkerchief
while coughing and sneezing are good efforts for resisting the spread of germs.
After wiping of cough with the handkerchief, it is essential to wash it on
returning home. If possible, you can use tissue paper for wiping cough. One
should avoid using or coming into contact with usable things of the diseased
persons. It is important that drinking water should be safe. To avoid cholera,
typhoid and bacterial diseases, it is a must to take safe drinking water. We should
use safe water for drinking, bathing, washing clothes and utensils. Water from
arsenic free tube-well is safe. Even clear water from ponds and rivers should be
boiled properly before use. Man, animal and birds should be treated properly
when they are ill. Birds with bird flue virus, should be killed and buried under the
soil. Cattle when suffer from mad cow or anthrax diseases.should be killed
because during its treatment, other animals may be attacked with such diseases.

Work: Visit houses in your area and see which houses have arrangements for
safe water. If anybody does not have such arrangement, tell them what

they should do.

Encourage everybody for leading a hygienic life. You are to have clear idea
about how germs get inside human body and how to resist them. Discussions

2025
Lower organisms 9

may be inttiated in schools, mosques, temples, playgrounds, market places and
places where a large number of people gather. The best preventive measure
is to make people aware of it. When attacked. the patient should call in a good
doctor and take his advice. If needed, medicine should be taken, Treatment of a
quack doctor leads to complication instead of curing it, We have much
responsibilities regarding it.

What we learned from this chapter-

> Virus, Bacteria, Fungi, Amoeba etc. are lower organisms.

> Virus 1s an acellular organism.

> Virus, Bacteria, Fungi and Amoeba, ec. are disease producing organism.
> Water, air and dirty hands spread germs.

> Healthy living prevents diseases,

EXERCISE
Fill in the gaps:
1. Cause of Typhoid in man is
2. The germ responsible for amoebic dysentery i is
3, Outside living body do not show any symptom of life.
4. Fungus named is used in bakery.
5, Rod like bacteria is called

Short answered questions:
1. What is meant by true parasite?
2. Write the names of four bacterial diseases.
3. What are the microbes’?
4, What are the materials virus particles made of?

Multiple choice questions:
1. Which Bacteria is responsible for Pneumonia?
a. Spirillum b. Bacillus
c. Coccus d, Comma

2. Algae is used in -
i. preparation of ice creams.
ii. pisciculture
iii. preparation of medicine.

Forma-2, Science. Class-7
10 Science

Which of the following answers is correct?
a. Land ii b. Land ill
c. li and il d. i, ii and ili
Read the following stem and answer the question no 3 and 4:
While chewing, Malek marked red scar on sugar cane. His father told him that
it was caused by one kind of parasitic organism,
3. Parasite as mentioned in the above stem produces —

1, Red rot
il. Inflammation of trachea
iii. Dandruff of the scalp

Which one of the following is correct?
a. i and ti b. i and iii
c. ii and iii d. i, iiand iti

4. Which one of the following is responsible for producing the disease
Malek pointed out?

a. Fungi b. Algae

c. Bacteria d. Virus

Creative questions

2025
2025

Lower organisms 11

a)
b)
c)
d)

What is Algae’?

Why are Fungi termed as saprophytes?

Explain the preventive measures against the disease caused by A.

B is a harmful organism but it is important for environment. Give
your comments with reasons.

Borkot is suffering from influenza. His father told him to use handkerchief
while coughing and sneezing.

What is virus?

Why is virus called acellular?

What are the reasons for telling Borkot to use handkerchief?

Analyze how Borkot would make others aware of the preventive measures
against the disease.

Do yourself:

1.

Soak a piece of bread with water and keep it in a dark room for few days.
White or black layer will appear on the bread. Take a bit from that
layer, examine under a microscope and draw sketches of what you
see. Discuss with your teacher.

Collect wrinkled leaves of papaya, Lady’s Finger and other plants and
discuss amongst your team members about the probable cause. Take
the help of your teacher if needed.
