Chapter Fourteen

Change of Climate

The earth is surrounded by atmosphere. Temperature, atmospheric pressure,
wind and humidity of the atmosphere of an area for a limited time is called
weather. Over all weather of an area for many years is called climate. Weather
and climate influence our life in various ways .In normal weather and climate
we lead normal life, Due to increase of temperature of the atmosphere, climate
of the earth is changing gradually. Bangladesh is harmed due to climatic changes.

L wet Sherrapunit
e
Bay of
Bengal a
p 0 China
Ser

(aj Winter Monsoon {b} Sumer Mansoan

After studying this chapter, we will be able —

> to describe different layers of the atmosphere.
® to explain importance of water cycle, oxygen cycle and carbon cycle,
> to explain weather and climate,

> to explain the causes of increase in temperature and change of climate.

Forma-2], Science, Class-7
162 Science

Lesson- 1 and 2 : Atmosphere of the Earth

You have learned in class six that the earth was very hot at the first stage of
creation. Gradually, it cooled down. At this time light gaseous substances form
the outer most part.

Gaseous part that encircles the earth is the atmosphere. You know that,
atmosphere is mainly composed of nitrogen and oxygen. Besides, there are
moisture, dust particles, argon, carbon dioxide and some more gases. The earth
attracts everything towards it. Due to this attraction gases of the atmosphere
remains near the earth surface. That is why atmosphere near the earth surface is
compact .As you ascend upward from the earth's surface, atmosphere becomes
lighter and lighter. If you want to ascend to the peak of a mountain, you will have
to carry oxygen with you for breathing. The atmosphere is extended to ten
thousand kilometers from the earth's surface. Earth's atmosphere is divided into
few layers. First four layers are Troposphere, Stratosphere, Mesosphere and
Thermosphere.

Thermosphere
Mesosphere
Stratosphere
Troposphsre
Barth Surface

Fig- 14.1: Different layers of atmosphere

Troposphere: Up to twelve kilometers from the earth surface forms the
troposphere. This layer contains most of the essential gases, like oxygen,
nitrogen, carbon dioxide and water vapour. In this layer all those things happen
that influence life of human beings and other organisms, such as cloud, rain,
wind, storm, fog etc. For these happenings troposphere is the most important
layer of the atmosphere.

2025
2025

Change of climate 163

Stratosphere ; From just above the troposphere stratosphere starts. This layer
starts from troposphere and extends up to about 50 kilometers from the earth's
surface. This layer contains one gas named Ozone. This gas protects us from
sun's harmful rays. This layer or above this layer contaims less amount of other
gases of the atmosphere.

Mesosphere: This layer starts from where stratosphere ends. With increase in
height of the layer temperature starts falling. This layer extends to an altitude of
about $0 km.

Thermosphere : This layer is almost airless. Here temperature rises fast, so tt

is called thermosphere. Radio signals are reflected from this layer.

Lesson- 3: Water Cycle in Environment

You have learnt water cycle in chapter eleven. Water cycle is very important for
the environment. Say if surface water including the sea water does not — evap-
orate and remains on the earth, what will happen? Definitely there will be no
rain, no water in the river. In that situation could we cultivate crops? Even we
could not get rain water or water from the river for irrigation. If there is no rain,
no underground water would be available. What would happen if ice on the
peak of the mountains and Polar Regions melts without remaining deposited
there? Quantity of sea water would have increased. That would cause
inundation of coastal areas, such as the southern part of Bangladesh.

Natural balance is maintained between demand and supply of water through
water cycle. You have realized that there is a big effect of solar heat on water
cycle. Any disturbance in water cycle will create problems for man and other
organisms. Over raining may cause flood if rain water cannot pass speedily.
Flood visits our country almost every year. Similarly, rise in earth's temperature
disturbs water cycle. We will know more about it in the last part of this chapter.

Lesson-4: Balance of Carbon and Oxygen in the Environment

You know that organisms take oxygen for the _ Atmosphere
purpose of respiration. After completion of the fa 2

process, they release carbon dioxide in the 4

environment. The plants take carbon dioxide
to manufacture their food and in this process
they release oxygen, In this way a balance is
maintained between oxygen and carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere. This balance in the
atmosphere is very important. These two gases
are essential for life. To understand the Fig-14.2: Balance of CO, and 0,

164 Science

of these two gases one has to understand carbon cycle.

Carbon is needed for the formation of body structure of all organisms. Carbon
comes from the carbon dioxide of the atmosphere. Plants prepare glucose and
oxygen from water and carbon dioxide of the atmosphere in photosynthetic
process. Glucose is prepared by plants. Animals get carbon through food from
the plants.

Carbon from the body of organisms comes back to the atmosphere through three
processes. Firstly, plants and animals at the time of respiration break glucose to
produce energy using oxygen from the atmosphere and release carbon dioxide.
Secondly, when plants and animals are burnt, carbon dioxide is produced and
mixed up with the atmosphere. Thirdly, when plant and animal bodies are
petrified by bacteria and fungi in the soil, they release carbon dioxide.

Now it is clear that the plants collect carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and
deposit it in plant and animal bodies through production of glucose. Carbon
from plants and animal body goes back to the atmosphere in three ways. In this
way, balance of carbon or carbon dioxide in the environment is maintained. Due
to these imbalance of nature the climate has been changed. We will learn it in
this chapter.

Lesson-5: Weather and Climate

Gusty wind may blow tomorrow from the north-west side of Dhaka and its
surroundings. Troughout the major part of the day, the sky will be free from
clouds. But in the evening there is a possibility of accumulation of dark clouds
in the north-east corner of the sky. Today relative humidity of Dhaka was 60
percent. Today's highest temperature was 34 degree Celsius at Kushtia and
lowest temperature was 24 degree Celsius in Sylhet.

Did you listen such bulletins at the end of radio or television news? What is the
news about? What do we learn from such news? Is there any possibility of storm
or rain? Can we learn whether it will be hot or cold tomorrow? Yes, usually the
last part of the news contains the bulletin whether there is a possibility of rain or
storm, what the day's temperature will be, how much rain fall was recorded and
in which places or what was the highest and lowest temperature of the day.
These are all weather bulletins. Is it possible to understand what weather is from
the weather report?

2025
2025

Change of climate 165

Weather:

Weather means the condition of atmosphere for a short period in a particular
area. Temperature and pressure of air, wind direction and speed, humidity or
quantity of water vapours in the air, cloud, fog and rain fall ete. make the
weather.

For example, when the highest temperature was 35 degree Celsius- it means that
the day's atmosphere was hot. When the highest temperature was 13 degree
Celsius-it means that the day was cold. The sky was cloudy or the day was
foggy-these conditions indicate weather for a short period.

Climate:

We use to say that today's weather was cool but it was too hot at noon. Weather
may change in no time. On the other hand climate does not change suddenly.
Climate is the average result of many years weather of an area. For example, we
use to say that climate of Bangladesh is hot and moist .It means in Bangladesh
one feels hot and the air is wet. Climate of Russia is mainly cold. This statement
indicates that Russia is cold round the year.

Differences between Weather and Climate

Factors of weather and climate are basically the same. Temperature, air
pressure, humidity (relative quantity of water vapours), rain fall are the factors
of weather and climate. When factors are same, what are the differences
between weather and climate? You have already known the relationships
between this two. Climate is actually the mean result of weather for a long
period. Now, let us see what the differences between weather and climate are.

1. Weather condition of a particular area for short period is called weather. And
climate is the average result of many years weather of an area.

2, Weather may change within a short span of time. But climate does not change
suddenly. When changes occur, it takes many years.

3. Weather of nearby places may vary. For example there was rainin Faridpur
but no rain in Barisal whereas usually climates of certain regions are the same.
Such as climates of Bangladesh, Thailand and West Bengal of India are similar.
166 Science

Lesson- 6, 7: Change of Weather

One day rising from the bed you may see bright sun outside, but do not feel
much hot. With the passing of time. temperature increased and you started
sweating. Gradually clouds are formed and at one time the sun is covered with
dark clouds. After some time, it started ramming cats and dogs. When the rain
stopped, the sky has become clear and the heat came down, Just think how
many times the weather changed in a day. Change of the weather is a normal
phenomenon. Why does weather change like this?

Main role is played by the sun in weather change. Now, we shall see how heatof
the sun plays role in changing of weather factors.

Dependence of Temperature of Weather on Solar Heat:

Heat also reaches the earth's surface with sun rays. When sun rays reach the
surface of the earth, it becomes heated. As a result. the lowest layer (iropo-
sphere) of the atmosphere also becomes heated and we feel much hot. At night
when sun sets, even the surface of the earth and the lowest layer of the atmo-
sphere remain warm. Because heat accumulated in day time could not be fully
released at night. Heat radiated by the earth's surface is absorbed and retained
by water vapour, carbon dioxide etc. That is why, we also feel hot at night. In
summer, the sun shines fromvertical position for longer period. So, we feel very
hot. On the other hand, in winter the sun shines obliquely from a longer distance
for shorter period, so we feel less hot.

Dependence of Air Pressure and Wind on Temperature:

Wind or blowing of air is the result of differential air pressure. For example we
see water flowing from higher level to lower level. Similarly air blows from its
higher pressure area to lower pressure area. With the change of temperature,
there is a change in the air pressure.

Air of an area becomes hot and goes upward when temperature of that area is
higher. So air of that area becomes light and a gap is created. That means the air
pressure falls. This condition is called depression. As a result air from
surrounding high pressure areas rush to the low pressure areas to fill up the gaps.
In this way wind is created. Areas where air temperature is low, air
concentration is higher. So, air pressure is also higher. When air pressure is high,
itis called high pressure.

2025
2025

Change of climate 167

In our country we see air blowing from north to south in winter. But in summer
we see that it is just opposite. Why does air blow in different directions in
different times? In winter the sun shines vertically in the areas south to
Bangladesh. So air pressure is lower. On the other hand the areas north to
Bangladesh is colder and air pressure is higher. In Bangladesh air blows from
the north to the south in winter season. The air which comes from land area,
contains less water vapour. So in winter season the air remains dry and produces
less rain.

In summer and rainy season the sun shines from vertical position in Bangladesh.
So in Bangladesh weather is very hot and air pressure is less. The region of the
Bay of Bengal and the north of Bangladesh is less hot; so the air pressure is
high. As a result air blows towards Bangladesh from the Bay of Bengal. This air
carries a large amount of water vapour from the Bay of Bengal. This water
vapour becomes cold and it rains. For this reason air is humid in summer and
rainy season and it rains heavily.

Lesson- 8, 9, 10 : Change of Climate

By this time you have already known that climate is the overall or average
weather condition of an area for many years. Climate of Bangladesh is hot and
humid. You know in Bangladesh average weather is hot but cold condition is
less prevalent. Winter is short, usually in the month of Poush and Magh cold is
felt. After that weather becomes less cold and gradually becomes hot. In
Baishakh and Jaistha, it is bit hotter. We name this two months as summer. Every
year in Baishakh a type of storm called nor-wester comes. From the very
beginning of Ashar raining starts, so the rainy season also starts. In the months
of Srabon and Bhadra air is very hot and raining continues, Then again weather
starts becoming cold and winter comes back in the month of Poush. This is the
normal scenario of climate in Bangladesh. The same climatic conditions existed
during the time when your parents were children. The same condition of the
overall weather or the climate stayed [or last twenty or thirty years.

Climate of any area does not change within a short time. But the scientists
predicted through experiment that the average temperature of the carth is
increasing gradually. This increase of temperature of the earth is called global
warming. Snow of the mountain peak and Polar Regions are melting due to rise
of temperature of the earth. Sea water is rising due to increased temperature. As
a result, sea level is also rising. If temperature increases in this way, the water
168 Science

level of the sea will go higher and higher. As its consequence low lying areas of
the world including Bangladesh will be inundated. Besides, this rise in
temperature will cause drought, excessive raining and much more natural
calamities.

Global average tamperature 4
14.5 .

14.0

Temperature (%C)

13.5

1850 7800 1850 2000
Year

Fig-14.3: Rise of atmospheric termperature

Causes of Global Warming : The main cause of global warming is the increase
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. You have learnt from this chapter that
carbon dioxide and oxygen come back in a cyclic order. So the balance of
carbon dioxide and oxygen is maintained. After industrial revolution in Europe,
different countries especially industrially advanced countries started burning
coal, petroleum, and natural gas. Carbon dioxide produced from burning of
these fuels is not spent or absorbed. Rather the number of plants is decreasing
for various reasons due to increased population. As a result amount of carbon
dioxide has increased in the atmosphere. Now the question is: why does the
temperature go up when the amount of carbon dioxide increases?

Work: Green house effect,

Materials required: lwo glasses of same measurement, measuring cylinder,

water, one clean and transparent plastic bag, two thermometers.

Procedure :

1. Take equal quantities of water by using measuring cylinder.

2. Place one thermometer in each glass. Note the temperature of water and
note it down in your note book.

3. Put one glass in the plastic bag and close it.

4. Now put both the glasses in the sun. Assume water of which glass will be
hotter. Give reasons in support of your answer.

5. After one hour observe the temperature of both the thermometers. Which
one ts higher? [s it according to your assumption? If not, explain the reason.

2025
Change of climate 169

You will see that the temperature of the glass in the plastic bag has increased
more. Can you say, why? Heat from the sun has fallen on both the glasses equal-
ly. Heat may enter the glass inside plastic bag, but it cannot come out. As a
result, the rate of temperature rise is higher m the glass covered with plastic.

In cold countries, plants cannot survive due to too much coldness. To produce
vegetables in too much cold conditions, glass houses are constructed, called
green houses. In winter season, when the sun is available for a short period, the
sun light enters through the glass and makes air, plants and soil heated. The
thermal radiation of heated air, soil, trees etc inside the house cannot pass out
through the class completely. As a result, glass houses remain warm during night
and the plants inside remain alive. The phenomenon of retention of heat in the
glass house is called green house effect.

Fig-]4.4: Green house

The earth may be compared with a green house. The earth is surrounded by the
atmosphere. The atmosphere contains carbon dioxide, methane and water vapour,
which act like green house vases. They do not resist heat from the sun from
coming, so heats [rom the sun make the earth heated. But it resists the heat to
radiate out. So the earth may remain heated at night also. These gases are called
green house gases. There are carbon dioxide, methane and water vapour in the

Forma-22, Science, Class-7
170 Science

atmosphere. It is a blessing for the human civilization. Because in absence of
these gases, heat from the earth would have radiated out and the earth would
become too cold. Now the question is: how can a blessing be a problem? The
problem is the increase of the quantity of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
Increased amount of carbon dioxide retams increased amount of heat. So, the
temperature of the earth is increasing. So the main cause of global warming is
the increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.

What steps can be taken to prevent global warming?

You have known the causes of climatic changes and global warming. We can
draw the following flow chart from above discussion.

Increase of . F

Rise of earth’s :
carbon dioxide temperature due to Global Climate
& CHyin the ereen house effect warming change

atmosphere

From the above flow chart, it is clear that the cause of climate change is global
warming. And the cause of global warming is the increase of carbon dioxide and
methane gas in the atmosphere. Then how can we prevent global warming and
climatic changes? Simple answer is to decrease the emission of carbon dioxide
and methane gas or to remove them from the atmosphere by some means. Meth-
ane gas cannot be removed because it is produced from agricultural activities.
At present, the main concern is to reduce the emission of carbon dioxide. By
reducing burning of coal, petroleum and natural gas and use of renewable
energy (such as; solar energy and wind may be used for producing electricity )
we can reduce emission of carbon dioxide. Another suggestion is put forwarded
for reduction of emission of carbon dioxide, is plantation of trees and other
plants. Because plants use carbon dioxide for synthesis of food. As a result, the
amount of carbon dioxide will be reduced.

What we learned from this chapter

> Atmosphere is extended few hundred kilometers from the earth's surface.
Atmosphere is divided into few layers. Main four layers are troposphere,
stratosphere, mesosphere and thermosphere.

2025
2025

Change of climate 171

>

a

ta

Twelve kilometers from the earth's surface of the atmosphere is the
troposphere. Maximum essential factors, such as oxygen, nitrogen and
carbon dioxide are present in this layer. All the activities that influence
the life of man and other organisms are present in this layer such as
cloud, rain, wind, storm, mist etc. So troposphere is the most mmportant
layer of the atmosphere.

Ozone gas is present in stratosphere layer. It saves us from harmful rays
of the sun.

Water from the earth's surface is converted to water vapour; from water
vapour to cloud; from cloud water returns to the earth's surface as rain.
Rain water flows to the river and ultimately to the sea. Return of water
in cyclic order is called water cycle. Through water cycle a balance is
maintained between demand and supply of water in the environment.

Living Organisms take oxygen from the atmosphere for respiration.
During of respiration they release carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
The plants absorb carbon dioxide for producing food and release
oxygen. In this way balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide is
established in the atmosphere. Balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide is
very important for the environment especially in the atmosphere. These
two gases are very important for life.

Weather is the temperature, pressure, wind, humidity of the atmosphere
of an area for a short period and the overall weather of an area for many
years is the climate.

The main role is played by the sun in weather change. Air pressure is
changed as a result of the change of temperature.

Climate of any area does not change suddenly. The scientists
observed afler calculation that the average temperature of the earth is
increasing gradually. This increase of temperature of the earth is called
global warming. Ice of the mountain peak and polar region are melting
due to the rise of temperature. Sea water is increasing due to the
melting ofice. Asaresult, sea level is rising. If temperature
increases like this, the water level of the sea will go on rising. As its
consequence, low lying areas of the world including Bangladesh will be
inundated. Besides, this rise in temperature will cause drought,
excessive raining, and more natural calamities to happen.
172

Science

> Climate is changing due to global warming. The main cause of global
warming is the increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. So the best
way to prevent global warming is to minimize the emission of carbon
dioxide.

EXERCISE

Fill up the gaps

1. Eleven kilometers from the earth’s surface of the atmosphere is

called

we wir

saves us from harmful rays of the sun.

. The overall weather of an area for many years is the

The main role is played in climate change by
If temperature increases sea water level also

Short answered questions

is

oie be

Explain why concentration of air is more in lowest or nearest layer of
atmosphere.

Why is troposphere most important?

Explain the water cycle with diagrams.

How balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide is maintained in the
atmosphere?

What is Green House Effect? How can global warming be explained
with its help ?

Multiple choice questions

1. Which layer of the atmosphere is nearly vacuum?

a. Troposphere b. Stratosphere

c. Mesosphere d. Thermosphere

2. In case of weather and climate—

i. Weather may vary in the same day in different places of the same country.

il. climates of Bangladesh and West Bengal are almost the same.

iii Factors of weather and climate are different.

2025
Change of climate 173

Which one of the following 1s correct?

aii b, i c. i and ii d, it and ii

Observe the Stem and answer question no. 3 and 4.

3. Inthe *T’ layer of the stem there is —
i. Oxygen and Nitrogen
il. Carbon dioxide and dust

ili, Ozone gas

Which one of the following is correct?
a.i and i b. i and ii
c.ii and = iti d. i, i and i
4. If temperature increases in “S’ layerof the stem —
i, Air pressure will increase
ii. Air will be light
iii, Air pressure will decrease
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i and ii b. i and iii

cl and ii d. i, and i

2025
174 Science

1. Creative questions

ee a %, Atmosphere
7!
y

a. What is underground water ?

b. Deseribe why stratosphere is important.

c. How do *Y* and ‘Z’ maintain balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide
in the environment? Explain.

d. If the quantity of gas expelled from Z increases .what disaster will

happen in the environment? Explain.

2. Highest and lowest temperature of Dhaka for one year (from January to
December) has been shown in the graph below :

~ |
| | NT

5|

+—— Temperature (*¢) ——~
"SJ
i
|
[
|

|
0123456 78 $ 101112

+—\——_-__ Month ———¥

graph

. Highest temperature
° Lowest temperature

2025
2025

Change of climate 175

a. What are the factors of weather ?

b. Why is the atmosphere in March in Bangladesh soothing?

c. As per the graph, in which month air pressure in Dhaka was the highest?
Explain.

d. In which month was there highest possibility of storm in Dhaka? Explain it

in the light of the graph.

The End
