2025

Chapter Nine
Heat and Temperature

Heat is a form of energy which is important for man. Heat gives us the sensation of
hotness. How much hotness we feel is expressed with temperature. Heat always flows
in three processes from a substance at a higher temperature to the substance at a lower
temperature. The pressure of air and humidity changes when heat is applied or heat is
removed as a result of changes to the temperature. Thus we are being influenced in
different ways with the influence of heat.

After studying this chapter we will be able—

> to distinguish between heat and temperature.

> to make relationship between Fahrenheit scale and Celsius scale.

» to measure the temperature precisely using thermometer.

p> to explain the pressure of air and humidity.

> to analyze the effect of change of temperature over the pressure and huminity
of air.

> to explain the process of heat transportation

> to explain the thermal expansion of substance.

> to explain the transfer of heat which causes different incidents all around.

> to distinguish between radiatior and absorber.
100 Science

Lesson 1: What is Heat?

You know all things im the universe are divided into two. One is matter which
has mass or weight, and resists while force is applied. Another is energy. Energy
has no mass. We can feel them with our sense. Heat is a kind of energy. Heat can
only be felt with the skin out of five senses.

Work: First take two glasses. Touch the glasses and see how cold or hot they are. Now
pour hot water into one glass and put pieces of ice in another one. Wait for two minutes.
Now throw hot water and ice out of the two glasses. Now hold and touch the two glass-
es by tums. How do you feel of the glasses? One is hot, another is cold. Now you
discuss yourself, what does the hot glass contain for which it is hot? Why did the other
glass feel cold? What does it have in it or does not have in?

Caution: Pour hot water in such a way so that it does not fall on your body, Never

touch the het water pot or glass with your bare hand.

Now we can say that anything hot or cold is the cause of heat. We feel anything hot or
cold due to heat. An object becomes hot when it absorbs heat and becomes cold when
it releases heat. The hot glass has absorbed heat from hot water. That's why it feels hot.
Om the other hand the other glass releases some heat. That's why it feels cold.

Lesson 2: What is Temperature?

You know that heat is a kind of energy for which any object becomes hot or cold and
we feel hot or cold. Let us do another work.

Work: Touch a steel glass with your hand. Whether it is hot or cold, keep it in your
mind. Now fill the steel glass with hot water. Now touch the glass after two minutes.
You will feel that the glass is becoming hotter gradually. Now throw the water out of
the glass and touch the glass after a minute. The glass is getting cold.

Caution: Pour hot water in such a way so that it does not fall on your body. Never
touch hot water pot or glass with your bare hand. You will not hold the glass which is

filled up with hot water for a long time.

Have you found that the hot water glass has got hot gradually? On the other hand, it has
got cold when hot water was thrown out. How much cold or hot? To understand it,
temperature is used. When the glass is too hot, the temperature is high. When the glass
is cold, the temperature is low. It means temperature of an object is a measure of how
much hot or cold the object is. Thus temperature expresses the thermal condition of
anything.

2025
2025

Heat and temperature 101

Then what did you understand the difference between heat and temperature?
Heat is a kind of energy which gives us the sensation of hot or cold for anything. On the

other hand, temperature of anything is the measure of how much hot or cold the thing
is Lc. temperature is the thermal condition of anything.

Lesson 3-5; Measurement of Temperature

You have seen before that the hot water glass gets hotter gradually if you touch the
glass after every two minutes. One morming we feel less hot but we feel hotter at noon,
We can understand by means of the touch anything or with our skin whether the hotness
is more or less. We understand a bit how much the heat has increased. But temperature
of an object cannot be determined accurately by means of touch, For correct
measurement an instrument is used. The name of the instrument used to
measure temperature is thermometer. Temperature of a human body is
measured by means of thermometer. Meteorologists use thermometer to
measure the temperature of air. Constant temperature is kept im mdustries.
That's why in industries they also use thermometer to measure the
temperature.

You will learn very clearly in the next lessons that when temperature chang-

es, the volume of liquid increases or decreases. Temperature canbe = mea- a aS
sured by the variation of the volume of liquid. Temperature is measured by a EY
using different liquids such as: mercury, alcohol etc. A description of a | = %
mercury thermometer is given below: = =
Mercury thermometer se
The type of thermometer that uses mercury as an indicator of temperature is [5 =
called the mercury thermometer. You have certainly seen the thermometer | #/=*

which is used to measure fever. It is mercury thermometer. It consists of a
thick-walled glass tube with a narrow and uniform bore. At one end there is
a thin walled bulb. The other end is kept open at first. The bulb is filled with
pure and dry mercury through the open end. The rest of the tube does not
contain anything except a small amount of mercury vapour, The tube is then Fig: 9.1
graduated according to a fixed scale for measuring temperature. The bore in

the tube of the thermometer is extremely narrow. So mercury goes upward to

a great extent if the temperature of the bulb slightly increases. How much
temperature increases can be understood by observing the mercury level on

the scale,

_ &

Do yourself: Determination of fever by using thermometer.

The normal temperature of human being is 98.4° Fahrenheit. It is called fever when
temperature bee beyond that. Measure the temperature of five learners of your class
using clinica! thermometer and write down them. Decide from this whether anyone
Bels Teyersn,

102 Science

Measuring Scale of Temperature

In order to measure anything, the first step is to fix a unit of the thing as a standard for
measurement, In measuring temperature, two fixed temperatures are considered as
standard. These are known as the fixed pomts. One is the freezing poimt and the other
is the boiling point.

The Freezing Point: The temperature at which pure ice melts under normal
atmospheric pressure is called the freezing point. It is used as the lower constant
of the thermometer.

The Boiling Point: The temperature at which pure water boils to vapour under
normal atmospheric pressure is called boiling point. It is used as the upper
boiling point in the thermometer.

The interval between the boiling point and the freezing point is divided into a suitable
number of equal divisions. The interval which is divided into a suitable number of
equal divisions gives us different scales based on it. Presently two scales of temperature
are followed. Two scales are explained below:

Celsius Scale: The freezing point in this scale is marked 0° and the boiling point is
marked 100°. The interval between two points is divided into 100 equal divisions. Each
division is called one degree Celsius (1 ° C). Scientist Celsius introduced this scale. It
was then named Celsius scale after his name, This scale is used for scientific works in
different countries of the world including Bangladesh, Such as: you hsten to weather
forecast that the maximum temperature of the day was30 C
degree Celsius. As the interval between the two points is ia BOILING POINT
divided into 100 divisions, it is also called centigrade ( —tod'c-217F—1315) |
centi means one hundred and grade means divisions) scale. Sees

Fahrenheit Scale: In this scale the freezing point is
marked 32 degree (32°) and the boiling point is marked
212 degree (212° ). The interval between the two points is
divided into 180 equal divisions. Each division is called
one degree Fahrenheit (1 * F).

Scientist Fahrenheit invented this seale. It is called
Fahrenheit Scale after his name. Such as: when you have
fever, anyone can say that your fever is 101 degree. In
reality the temperature of your body was 101 degree
Fahwenheit.

Relation between Celsius and Fahrenheit
Scales:

If you know the temperature in Celsius Scale, it can
easily be transformed into Fahrenheit Scale and vice
Celsius and Fahrenheit Scale versa. For this, you have
to know an equation.

FREEZING POINT
~— Oc-arrF
OF WATER

Fig- 9,2 : Celsius and Fahrenheit Scale

2025
2025

Heat and temperature 103

The equation is a — #32

9
Where, C =the temperature in Celsius Scale,

F = the temperature in Fahrenheit Scale

Now let us look at an example.

Example: A player of the Bangladesh Cricket Team fell sick while playing in Australia.
An Australian doctor measured his temperature and found it 38°C. What was the body
temperature of that player in Fahrenheit scale?

Solution :

We know, © — _F-32
5 9

Here, C— 38

Or, 5x (F-32)=9 x 38
Or, F-32 = 342/5

Or, F = 68.4432
- F=100.4

The body temperature of that player in Fahrenheit scale is 100.4°F,

Work: Take a Celsius Scale and Fahrenheit Scale which is used to measure fever.
Measure the temperature of your five fnends in your class using the Fahrenheit

Seale. Using the formula transform the measured temperature into Celsius Scale
and fill up the table given below.

Name of Temperature in Temperature in Remarks
learners Fahrenheit Scale Celsius Scale

104 Science

Lesson 6, 7: Expansion of Matter Duc to Effect of Heat

Most of the substances expand in volume by the application of heat. The
expansion is so minor for solid. Most of the liquids do not expand so much by
the application of heat but the gaseous substance expands more by the
application of heat.

Expansion of solids:

Work: Proof of expansion of solids.
Required equipment: A brass ball, ring, fire and stand.
A brass ball and a ring are so made that the ball can simply pass
through the ring when it is cold. Insert ring and ball to stand as
shown in the figure. Now try to pass the ball through the ring. You
will see that the ball has passed through the ring. Now take the ball
and heat it. Try to pass the ball through the ring. Is the ball going to
pass through the ring? No, it is not passing.
; : ; i ' Fig-9.3; Bm
Caution: Be careful while working with the hot matters/objects. a oa “

Why is not the brass ball passing through the ring when it is heated? The reason
is that the ball has expanded. The ball has expanded a little due to heat. It proves
that most of the solids expand by the application of heat. But this expansion is so
minor that we cannot understand easily, Generally metal expands a great by the
application of heat in the solid matter.

The Effect of Expansion of Solids in Our Daily Life

We will understand how we make the best use of expansion of solid in our daily
life from the examples given below:

1. Have you ever seen that the neck of some glass bottle (which contains jam,
sauce) is so tightly fitted that it cannot be opened easily? At this stage generally
the metallic neck of the bottle is heated. Then it is opened so easily by twisting.
Why does the neck open so easily then? Because due to heat the metallic neck
expands and opens up. So it opens so easily then.

2. Have you seen rail lines? The train runs on the two parallel iron strips. You
may have seen that there is a gap between two consecutive rails of a rail line.
What is the cause of it? In fact, some gaps are kept between two consecutive
rails willingly. The iron rails turn hot when the trains run on it and it is caused
due to the friction of wheels with them. As a result the lines increase in length.
If there is no gap left between the rails, the line will be twisted. The rails increase
and fill us the gap so that the lines do not twist or bend.

2025
Heat and temperature 105

Expansion of Liquid: The expansion of liquid is much higher than the
expansion of a solid in volume. Thermometer is made using the expansion of
liquid metal mercury. Already you have learnt it. You will learn in the chapter
titled 'The Change of Climate that the temperature of the earth is increasing. As
aresult the height of the sea surface is increasing as well for the expansion of the
volume of the sea water.

Expansion of Gases:

Equipment: A glass bottle. two water tubs, hot and cold water, balloon,
thread.

Work: Take a strong and empty glass bottle. Tie a balloon with a thread to
the neck of the bottle. Take boiling water in one tub and cold water in anoth-
er tub, Now dip the bottle in hot water cautiously. What do you see? The
balloon has blown away a little. Now dip the bottle in cold water. Has the
balloon soaked? Why is it happening?

Caution: Be careful in using boiling water.

The gas expands a great while it is heated. If we dip the bottle in hot water, the
gas inside of the bottle gets heat and expands. As a result the balloon has blown
away after receiving the air from the bottle. If we dip the bottle in cold water, the
inside air of the bottle contracts. As a result the air of the balloon comes back
into the bottle. That is why the balloon is soaking. It proves that the gaseous
substances expand due to heat.

The effect of expansion of gas: The effect of expansion of gas is formed in
nature and in our daily life. Have you seen baking bread? At one stage the bread
goes up a great. If we put a hole on the bread, something comes out with a sound.
Why does such happen? You know, that bread is made with the combination of
flour and water. The inside water in the bread turned into vapour. Vapour
expands more while heated. As a result, the bread swells.

Engine is driven by the use of expansion of gas due to heat. You will understand
more when you will be grown up. Fuel burnt heat expands gas which helps drive
the engine. Engine is driven by the shocks of the expanded gas. Atmospheric
change is found for the expansion of air due to heat. We will know about this
from the discussion given below.

Forma-14, Science, Class-7
106 Science

Lesson 8: The Effect of Temperature Over Humidity and
Atmospheric Pressure

The particles of air move to and fro in air. They apply force when they are
obstructed. As a result, pressure exists in air. The applied force of air per unit
area is called the pressure of air. The air exerts pressure at all directions. The
atmospheric pressure of anywhere depends upon their temperature. The
atmospheric pressure is increased within a confined pot when the temperature
rises. The reason 1s that the atmosphere is not confined, it is open. Air gets hght-
er and goes up when heated. For this, the density of air decreases and air pressure
decreases. This is why if the temperature of a place increases, then air pressure
falls down i.e. depression takes place. High pressure takes place where tempera-
ture is low.

Water vapour, air humidity and temperature: You know that the water of
earth's surface turns into vapour and mixes with air. Air contains water vapour
more or less all the time. The amount of water vapour in air is expressed as the
humidity of air. If air contains more water vapour, the humidity will be more. If
air contains less water vapour, the humidity will be less, The water turns into
vapour more when temperature increases. On the other hand, air contains more
water vapour if temperature increases. In our country we feel sultry weather
during the month of Srabon and Bhadro. Then by the influence of monsoon a lot
of water vapur floats and comes to land from the Bay of Bengal. Sweating of our
body takes place when humidity is more in the air. When water vapour increases
too much, at one stage it is condensed and turns into cloud and at last it rains.

Lesson 9-10: Transmission of Heat

Have you ever marked that a steel spoon gets hot when it is kept in a hot curry
bowl? How does heat flow away from curry to hand? Heat flows from places of
higher temperature to places of lower temperature. The process of heat that
transfers from one place to another is known as heat transmission. Heat flows by
the processes-Conduction, Convection and Radiation.

Heat conduction: Heat flows through the spoon from hot curry bowl by the
process of conduction. Heat flows to solid substances by this process. You know
the particles of solid substances cannot change their positions. They can vibrate
from their own positions. Hot particles push adjacent cold particles and they are
heated in tum and vibrate rapidly. In this way heat goes from one end to the
other. Thus the heat flows from hot end to cold end without changing the
position of the particles.

2025
2025

Heat and temperature 107

Among solid substances, metals such as; Iron, Copper, Brass, Aluminum, Zinc
conduct away heat rapidly. So, the utensils made of metals are used to cook.
Heat is conducted away to a minimum by non-metals such as; wood, cotton,
cloth, soil etc. That's why, we use a cloth to hold the hot pots. For this reason,
wooden stick is convenient for cooking purpose.

Convection: Heat flows to liquid and gas by this process only. Take a pot and
put some water and place it on the burner. Then the whole water gets heated. In
this case, the particles of water absorb heat and get energy. After getting energy
water particles become lighter and goes up. The top particles of cold water goes
down and absorb heat, Thus, all the particles in turns absorb heat and get heated,
Then heat transfers from one place to another. Thus, hot water from the bottom
eatries heat above the cold water which goes downward and gets itself heated
and then goes up again. The process continues until all the water is equally
heated and attains the same temperature. This process of heat transfer is called
convection. Like the particles of liquid, particles of gases get heated and transmit
heat so easily by changing its positions. Have you ever stood by the side of a fire
in winter? The villagers bask by burning woods or twigs during winter. We feel
hot while standing by the side of fire. But if you put your hand over the fire
carefully, you will feel warmer. Because by the process of convection the parti-
cles of air get heated and go up but do not go aside. So, we feel hotter over the
fire rather than standing aside.

Heat radiation: The sun is the main source of heat. The distance between the
earth and the sun is open place. There is no gaseous substance. Then how does
the heat come to the earth from the sun? Heat comes from the sun through
radiation. Heat transfers through radiation where there is no non-living body.
You will know it in higher class that heat is a kind of wave which can be
transformed from hot place to cold place. Heat transforms or flows in the form
of wave duting radiation. In fact, whether it is surrounded by a medium or not, a
heated object emits heat by radiation.

Any substance that radiates heat is called a radiator. And any substance that
absorbs heat is called an absorber. When a substance radiates or absorbs heat due
to its temperature, it is called thermal radiation or thermal absorption. Scientists
have observed that a good radiator is also a good absorber.

Ifnot a radiator will continue to radiate more and more heat and become cooler,
and an absorber will continue to heat up absorbing more and more heat. The
hydrogen gas in the sun turns into helium gas, producing heat and light. This
heat and electromagnetic waves travel through space to carth and keeps the earth
warm to habitable temperature. During the day, any part of the earth radiates less
108 Science

heat energy than it absorbs. As a result, some part of the earth gets heated durmg
the day. At night, that part of the earth becomes cool by radiating more heat
energy. Some gases in the atmosphere such as carbon dioxide, methane, water
vapor, etc. block the heat radiation, so the earth’s atmosphere is slowly warming
up. This is called global warming.

What we learned from this chapter-

> Heat is a kind of energy by which we feel hot or cold. On the other hand
how much cold and hot we feel can be expressed by temperature.

> Mercury is used to measure temperature in simple work. Temperature
has two scales. Celsius Scale and Fahrenheit Scale.

> Generally matter expands by the application of heat, Solid or liquid
expands a little. But the gas expands a great.

> Arr pressure and humidity changes with the change of temperature which
play arole for changing weather! climate,

> Heat transmits in three processes- through conduction, convection and
radiation.
EXERCISE
Fill in the gaps

1. Heat flows through liquid and gas by the process of
2. The temperature which boils pure water and turns into vapour in

normal pressure, 1s called the point.
3. The freezing point of Celsius Scale ts degree Celsius.
4. The freezing point of Fahrenheit Scale is degree
Fahrenheit.
5 of air decreases when the amount of vapour is less.

Short answered questions

1, What are the differences between heat and temperature?

2. Why is a gap kept between two consecutive rails of a rail line?

3. We feel warm by the side of a fire. We feel warmer or hot if we keep
our hand over fire. Why does that happen?

4. Why do we not hold cooking hot pot with bare hand? Why do we use a

piece of cloth?

Why does the pressure of atmosphere decrease when temperature increases?

ry

2025
2025

Heat and temperature 109

Multiple choice questions

1. Which acts as a well absorber of atmosphere?
a. Nitrogen b. Water vapour c. Oxygen d. Dust

2. Characteristic of temperature is that it-

a. Can be felt b. Can be measured
c. ls akind of energy d. Resists while force is applied

Watch out the figure below and answer the question number 3 and 4:
3. Thermometer as shown in figure 2:

(i) Freezing point 32°F
(ii) Fundamental division 200° F
(iii) Melting point 232° F

Which one of the following is correct?

al b. ii
¢. Land ti d. i, ii and wi

4. In figure | and Figure 2 what will happen to liquid with the thermal touch?

a. The flow of heat will be from 1 to 2

b. The flow of heat will be from 2 to |

c. The flow of heat will be continued

d. Both temperatures will reach to room temperature

Creative questions

1. Sharmin reads in class seven. One evening she feels feverish. The temperature

measured in Celsius Scale is 37°C, Sharmin can understand Fahrenheit Scale

temperature instead of Centigrade Scale. Being anxious she goes to a doctor to

measure the temperature. The doctor measuring thermometer and finds no fever.
a. What is temperature’

Explain the advantage of mercury thermometer.

What was the temperature in Fahrenheit Scale at Sharmin's body?

Explain with reason whether Sharmin would go to the doctor if she

knew the relation between Fahrenheit and Centigrade Scale.

Bes
110 Science

2. Kajal observes daily activities that happen in his life very carefully. One day
he saw that the lid of the cooking pot fell down due to heat. On the other hand she
noticed some gaps in their door in winter season where he found no gap in
the summer. Both the incidents made her thoughtful.

a, Which matter expands more due to heat?

b. Why is a gap kept between two consecutive rails of a rail line?

c. Explain the cause of incidents which Kajal observed while cooking was

poing on.

d. Analyze the cause of the two behaviour of wooden door which Kajal
observed during winter and summer season.

2025
