Chapter Eight
About Sound

When a spell of rapping sound is made at the door of your house, you can
understand that someone is waiting at your door. We can understand that
someone has come when the doorbell rings. You can understand that someone is
coming hearing the sound of foot steps. Sound plays an important role in our
life. It helps to communicate with others. We hear different types of sound
around us. Tune of a flute, horn of a car, dog's barking, baa baa of goat, crows of
hen, sweet rote of bird etc. Sound is a kind of an energy which helps us to hear.

How is sound produced? How is sound circulated? How can we recognize
different sounds? We shall discuss in this chapter.

After studying this chapter, we will be able-

v¥ ¥YVVY WWW Ww

to describe the characteristics of sound.

to explain the circulations of sound.

to compare the velocity of sound through solid, liquid and gaseous.

to explain how animal can hear sound.

to explain the limit of audibility and noise.

to explain the ways of producing sound by the sound making machine.
to conscious and to make other conscious about the bad effect of making,
sound (noise and pollution) in our daily life.

to hear from our team mate in group work, to take part actively
and will co-operate to take decision,

2025
About sound 89

Lesson-1: Sound and Its Characteristics

We hear is sound through our ears. Drop a steel bowl on the floor, you will hear
sound. When you talk, you hear a sound from your mouth. Arian gets up from
sleep hearing his alarm clock. She hears different kinds of sounds on the way to
school. Birds chirping, sounds of rickshaw bell, horns of cars, and men's noise are
different kinds of sound. When friends talk, you can recognize all sounds from
the voice and you can say who is producing the sound. Some sounds we hear are
pleasing to the ear. It contains tunes and is pleasing to ear. Such sounds are tune
of flute, and sound of Harmonium. Some are noisy, tuneless and disturbing. Such
sounds are sound of vehicles, sound of cutting iron and dogs’ barking.

Work: To identify tuneful and tuneless sound.

Process: Form different groups taking 5/6 pupils in each. Discuss and decide
yourself which one is tuneful and which one is tuneless from those different sounds
which you hear. Make a list of tuneful and tuneless sound from your discussion,
Then anyone of each group present it to the class.

Tuneful and tuneless sound whatever it may be, all the sounds have a source.
Sound is produced from any source. We can understand the source of sound
from its characteristics. Such as: by hearing the sound of barking, we can
understand that the dog is barking. To raise the telephone receiver we can
understand that someone is talking from the other end.

Lesson 2 - 3: Origin of Sound

Sound is a kind of energy that produces the feeling of hearing. Now, we will do
some works from which we can understand that how sound is produced. When
your school bell rings, touch it. Can you feel that the bell vibrates?

Work: To know the cause of origin of sound.
Required equipment: A metallic pot, some ropes and a
stick.

Process: Hang the metallic pot (it may be steel or

aluminium) with a rope. Keep it in mind that it does not @

touch anything. Now strike the pot with a stick. Touch the = =

pot with the help of your finger softly. Do you feel the Me.

vibration of the pot? Strike the pot with a stick again and

instantly hold the pot tightly. Are you hearing the sound

yet? No, you can’t hear.

Strike the pot again, you'll hear the sound. Touch the

pot when the sound is stopped. Is the pot vibrating FigW:1 Otigin of Soun
yet? No, it is not vibrating.

Forma-12, Science, Class-7
o) Science

Work: To know the cause of origin of sound.
Required equipment: A metal (steel) plate, a spoon,
and some water.

Process: pour water on the plate. Strike the one edge
of the plate with spoon. Are you hearing sound?
Strike the plate once again and touch the plate
instantly. Do you feel that the plate is vibrating? Are you hearing the sound yet?
No, you don’t hear. Strike the plate again and look at the water. Do you see any

wave on water? The water is vibrating as a result of vibration of plate and it is
making wave on water.

Fig- $2: Origin of Sound

We have come to learn from the above activities that sound is produced

through the vibration of the object. Vibrating object which produces sound is
called source of sound.

Lesson-4: Circulation of Sound or Propagation of Sound

We know vibrating object makes sound. How does the sound reach to the
listeners? Let us consider an example. Any vibrating wire of a musical
instrument or any vibrating arm of a tuning fork vibrates the molecules
of air around them. The vibration passes or transfers to next molecules of
the air. The sound reaches to the listeners by turns from a source like wave.
The movement created by the vibrating particles of any medium which is
circulated through a medium is called wave. Take a long spring, strike its one
end and you will find as a result of its construction and expansion, it circulates
energy. The wave of sound circulates in the same way. The movement of
sound from one place to another is called the circulation of sound.

Direction of wave

Vibration

Contraction Expansion

Fig-8.3: Circulation of Sound

2025
2025

About sound 91

Circulation of sound needs a medium. The medium may be solid, liquid or
gaseous. Sound circulates very fast through solid medium, then liquid medium
and then gaseous medium. We will prove it later through activities.

Can sound be circulated without medium? We will do an activity for the answer
of this question.

Work: To know sound does not circulate without medium.
Required equipment: A metallic musical

instrument, a stick with smal] diameter, a wide

mouthed bottle and a cork.
Process: Tic up a musical instrament with : K
thread at one end of the stick. Push the other a) ib) , )
end of the stick through the cork. Now the full, “| \

| 1
arrangement is pushed into the bottle in sucha {| << 3 al TT
way that the cork works as a stopper. Tight up | |
the stopper well and shake the bottle. Keep it in Ee ele wt oka
mind that the musical instrument does not
touch one wall of the bottle. You will hear the sound of musical instrument
from outside. Now open up the cork and keep it at a little height. Now heat the
bottle with a burning candle. A lot of air will escape from the bottle for
heating. Then tight up the cork of the bottle. Shake the bottle when it is cooled.
Do you hear a sound? You can hear a little sound. If all the air in the bottle was
gone, no sound would be heard. What does it mean? It means sound that
cannot be circulated without medium,

Lesson-5: Propagation of Sound Through Liquid and Velocity of
Sound.

We have told before that circulation of sound needs a medium. Sound
cannot be circulated without medium. Sound circulates fast through solid, then
liquid and then gaseous. We will prove it through work:

Work: Circulation of sound through liquid.

Required equipment: A balloon and some water. a5 iN
Process: Fill the balloon with water. Give your ear to one side Kop (/
of a balloon and scratch the other side of the balloon softly. Are you \b =i
hearing the scratching sound’? | rol

You will hear the scratching sound loudly and clearly, Fig-8.5. Sound through liquid

92 Science

Lesson-6: Circulation of Sound Through Solid and Its Velocity of
Sound.
Sound circulation is fast and more clear through solid medium than air and liquid.

Work:. Circulation of sound through solid.
Required equipment: A metallic scale and a long metallic rod. =
Process: Put an end of scale or rod to your ear and ask your friend ~

to scratch the other end slowly, Are you hearing the
sound of scratching? Ask your friends who are tag: ee CUA Beda
standing beside you whether they are hearing sound or through selid substances
not?

You can do the same test with a wooden or metallic table. Do the work and see
and note down in your notebook what you have found. You will learn from this
experiment that sound can be circulated through metal or wood, The velocity of
sound varies with the variation of solid substances.

Table : Comparison among the velocity of sound in the air, liquid and solid medium

The velocity of sound in the air = 343 meter/second
The velocity of sound in the water = 1496 meter/second

The velocity of sound in aluminium = 6420 meter/second

So, the velocity of sound differs from medium to medium. Sound
can be circulated fast and more clearly through solid substances than the
medium of liquid or air. On the other hand sound can be circulated fast
and more clearly through liquid than the medium of air.

Lesson-7: How Can Animals Hear Sounds?

We know, the vibrating objects produce sound and that sound is circulated
all the directions through medium, Now the question is: how can we hear sound?

The outer shape of our ear looks mostly ke a funnel. When sound enters into
it, sound goes through a hole where there is a stretched thin layer at the end.
This is called Tympanum.,

This layer plays an important role. The role is that the vibration of sound
vibrates the Tympanum. Vibration reaches inside the air through this. Sound

2025
2025

About sound 93

reaches to the brain from there, Thus the ear can hear the sound, We will do the
test to know the important role of Tympanum.,

Work: How does the vibration of sound vibrate on Tympanum?
Required equipment: A tin pot (you can take a piece of soft drink can)
and a rubber balloon.

Process: Cut the two end of the can. Close the one end of "
the can with the balloon which is tied up tightly with <=> =
thread or rubber band. Put 4 or 5 grains of wheat or i. |
rice on the tightly tied up balloon, Ask your friend to | I my
make a sound ‘hurrah’, ‘hurrah’ in front of the open end ="
of the can, Be aware of what happens to wheat or rice, Fig-8.7: Vibration of Sound
Why does wheat or rice jump up and down? Vibrate on Tympanum

The vibration of sound created by your friend vibrates the balloon. That's

why wheat or rice was jumping.

Lesson 8-9: Limit of Audibility and Noise.

We know that sound is produced as a result of vibration of an object. Can we
hear the sound of all vibrating objects? No, we cannot hear the sound of all
vibrating objects. Man cannot hear the sound which creates 20 vibrations/
second. Such sound is not audible. Such sound is called inaudible sound. On
the other hand we cannot hear the sound which produces more vibration. We
cannot hear the sound which produces more than 20000 vibrations / Second.
Such sound is also inaudible. Such sound is called ultrasound. So the limit of
audibility for man is created sound ranging from 20 to 20000 vibrations. The
number of vibrations per second of an object is called the frequency. It is denoted
by the unit Hertz. When any object vibrates 20/second, its vibration is 20 Hz, if it
vibrates 20,000/second, the vibration is 20,000 Hz. So the limit of audibility of man
is from 20 to 20,000 Hz, Such limit of vibration of sound is called audible sounds.

Some animals can hear the sounds which has more than 20,000 Hz. The dog
has this ability. Police uses high frequency whistles which the dog can hear but
man cannot. In medical science we are familiar with excess sound creating

machine. One of them is ultra-sonogram. This machine works with more than
20,000 Hz of frequency.
94 Science

Well Audible Sound and Noise: We can hear different sounds all around, Out
of them some sounds are pleasing to ear and comfortable, Such sounds are tune
of songs, tune of flutes, the sound of Harmonium, and play on Sitar ete. Such
sounds are called well audible sounds. Many sounds are unpleasant, harsh and
disturbing to the ear. Such sounds are- the sound of pushing nail, sound of
construction, the sound of chalk while we write on the board. The uniformed
of vibration of an object produces well audible sound. The sound which is
unpleasant to the ear uncomfortable and disturbing is called noise.

Sound Pollution: We all are acquainted with pollution of air and water.
We call pollution of water when it contains foreign particles. In our environment
if there is excess or unexpected sound, then we call it pollution of sound. The
main causes of pollution are: horn of vehicles, explosion, sounds of machines,
sound of mikes and sound of construction works. Besides, watching TV or
listening to radio with excessive sounds, the sounds from kitchen, sound of air
cooler etc, are the causes of sound pollution.

Work: Point out the causes of sound pollution in your area and note down the
causes after discussion. You can make a group of 5-6 persons to do the work.

What harms does sound pollution causes?

You know the excessive sound all around creates health hazards. The
problems are insomnia, headache, high blood pressure, disturbance, depression
and many other problems. Ifa man hears a loud sound, it may be the cause of hard
of hearing even he/she can be deaf.

How can we prevent contamination of sound?

If we want to prevent the contamination of sound, we have to control the
source of sound. How can we do it? If we want to prevent contamination of
sound in a residential area-
* We should keep out all the things which create noise.
« We will not establish any factory in residential area which creates noise
« Less use of homs of vehicles.
e We should not use radio, TV and other musical instruments with loud voice.
e We have to plant trees around the houses, by the side of a road so
that they can prevent sound,

Besides, in order to prevent contamination of sound, silencer should be used
with the engine of aero-plane, vehicles, engines and machinery of factory.
Silencer is an arrangement which does not allow sound to go out by fits and starts,

2025
2025

About sound 95

Lesson-10 & 11: Sound Making Machines

Sound making machines are of two kinds- Musical instruments and non-
musical instruments. Musical instruments are: flute, harmonium, one stringed
and two stringed instruments and Sitar ete. Our familiar non-musical instruments
are the horn of vehicles and the bell of bicycle or rickshaw.

Flute: sound is created by the inside vibrating air of a flute. Air is pushed
inside the flute pipe by blowing. The intensity of sound depends upon the
length and number of holes of the flute.

Work: To observe the change of intensity

of sound with the open length of tube.
Required equipment: a straw or tube

which is used in drinking, a scissors. —
Process: Make the tube flat, cut the flat

end which will be pointed, blow the

cutting end with your mouth. Fig- 8.8; Change of intensity of sound with the
Observe what kind of sound produces. length of tube

Now cut the other end of the tube and make it shorter. Can you hear the
difference of intensity of sound?

The intensity of sound is more of the shorter tube.

Mono chord musical instruments and two stringed musical instruments:

These are stringed based musical instrument. The instruments produce pleasing
sound with the help of vibrating string/wire. The string of a musical instrument
vibrates and creates melodious sound when it is pulled or pushed by something.
The intensity of sound can be changed by increasing or decreasing its length or
thickness of the string.

Fig- 8.9: Mono chord and two stringed musical instruments
6 Science

Bell of a bicycle or rickshaw: We are familiar with the
sound of bell of a bicycle or rickshaw a (Tung Tang). Do ©

you know how this bell produces sound? A round metallic |S
bowl is putupset. A metallic hammer is inserted under the bowl.
It has a handle by which the hammer can be moved to and
fro which hits the bowl. It produces sound Tung/Tang as a

result of vibration of the bowl. Fig-8.10: Bell of a bicycle

New words learnt from this chapter:

Audible, Inaudible, Ultrasound, Tympanum, act of hearing- pre sound, act of
hearing-post sound, pleasing sound, noise, contamination of sound.

What we learned from this chapter-

Sound is produced through the vibration of sound.

Propagation of sound needs medium. Sound cannot move through the
medium of vacuum.

The limit of audibility of man’s ear is 20 to 20000 Htz.

Dog can hear the sound which has frequency more than 20000 Htz.
Below 20 Hz frequency is called hearing pre-sound.

Above 20000 Hz frequency sound is called hearing post-sound.

The velocity of sound is the highest in solid and the lowest in the air.
Disturbing sound is called noise.

The presence of excessive sound in the environment is called contamination
of sound. Contamination of sound is injurious to health. Sound may be
the cause of insomnia (sleeplessness), headache, high blood pressure,
disturbance etc.

>» Contamination of sound may be reduced to a minimum level by planting
trees around the houses and by the roadsides.

YVVVY¥WW WV ¥

EXERCISE

Fill in the gaps

Sound does not circulate without ‘

The limit of audibility of man is from Hertz to 200000 Hertz.
Unexpected & disturbing sound ts called

The velocity of sound in the air is the

The sound above 20000 Hertz vibration is called

Pepe mt

2025
About sound o7

Short answered questions
1. What are the differences between audible and inaudible sound?
2. What do you mean by act of hearing-pre sound and act of hearing-post sound?
3. What are the differences between noise and pleasing sound?
4. Can we hear the sound of all vibrations? What is the limit of our audibility?

Multiple choice questions:

1. Which medium circulates the highest velocity of sound?
a. Vacuum b. Solid c. Gaseous d. Liquid
medium medium medium medium

Read the passage given below attentively and answer the question no. 2
and 3,

The explosions on the surface of the moon and shooting a gun on the surface
of the earth, in both cases the flashes of light are seen.

2. To hear the sound of explosion on the surface of the moon from the earth-

1. The distance of moon will be less
ii. The medium must be in between the earth and the moon
i. = The limit and audibility will be 20 to 20000 Hz.

Which one is correct?
a i b. ul c. tii d. ii and iti
3. Which one will be observed last if both the incidents take place at a time?
a. Thesoundof b. The light «. The sound = d. The light

gun fire produced by of explosion of explosion
gun fire
4. Which instrument produces sound with the help of its inside vibration?
a. Sitar b. Monochord ¢. Guitar d. Flute
instrument

Creative questions:

1, The velocity of sound is 330 m/sec (air). The
velocity of sound in sea water is 1500m/sec.
The man standing on the sea shore and the
diver are 3300 meters away from the place
of the bomb explosion.

Forma-13, Science, Class-7
98 Science

a. What is sound?

b. Why do you hear the sound of railway
movement from a distance if you put the ear on the rail?

c. After how much time will the man standing on the shore hear the sound
from the place of the bomb explosion?

d. Will the diver hear the sound of the explosion of the bomb at the same
time as well? Give reason in favour of your answer.

2. The sound of school bell was not heard for a long from Tapan’s house.
Recently the shape of the bell has been changed keeping the weight as before. As
a result now he can hear the sound of the school bell from his house.

a. What is pleasing audible sound?

b. What change will come to the Mute if the length of the tube of the flute is lesser?

S

Describe the techniques of reaching sound to Tapan’s ear from the school bell.

a

What kind of change has been made to the bell for which Tapan can hear the

sound from his house? explain this with appropriate causes,

2025
