Chapter Three
External Morphology of Plants

Sometimes roots, stems and leaves are modified in such a way that they
cannot be identified. This chapter will deal with why they are so modified and
how they can be identified.

After studying this chapter, we will be able —

y to explain the structure of modified roots.

> to explain the structure of modified stems.

> to explain the structure of modified leaves.

> to explain the importance of modified roots, stems and leaves.
> to draw figures of modified roots, stems and leaves.

> to realize the importance of modified roots, stems and leaves in our life.

Forma-4, Science. Class-7
26 Science

Lesson |: Modifications of Main Root

The main function of root is to entangle trees with soil, Roots may be modified
for performing special functions. Now modifications for food storage will be
discussed. We are familiar with radish, carrot and turnip and take them as food.
Are they roots or stems? Look for a while now whether they bear nodes and
internodes? Do they have leaves’? No, they don’t have. Leaves found above the

soil grow from small stems just above the roots. Qn the basis of their shapes,
they are of four types, such as —

Fig 3.1 Fusiform Fig : 3.2 Conical Fig :3.3 Napiform Fig : 3.4 Tubercular
Different types of modified root

Fusiform roots: These roots store food and become thick and juicy. The middle
portion of this root is thick and two ends are gradually tapering, such as Radish.

Conical roots: They store food, so the main root becomes thick and juicy. The
upper side is broad and the lower side is gradually tapering, such as Carrot.

Napiform root: In this case, upper portion of the root becomes rounded due to
storage of food. Lower part suddenly becomes thin, such as Turnip.

Tubereular root: The main root swells irregularly due to storage of food. They
have no particular shape, such as Mirabilis (Sondhya maloti)
Lesson : 2—4: Modified Adventitious Roots

Adventitious roots are modified for performing special functions. It is modified
mainly for three reasons, such as storage of food, mechanical support and
physiological activities.

2025
2025

External morphology of plants 27

Modified for Storage of Food:

Different types of aroots are modified for storage of foods for future use and
become swollen to attain different shapes, such as, root tuber of sweet potato,
fasciculated root of Dahlia and Asparagus and moniliform roots of Bitter gourd.
Root tuber of sweet potato grows from nodes near the soil level and becomes
irregularly swollen for storage of food and attains an indefinite shape. Storage of
food is the modified function of these roots.

Tubercular Roots: Adventitious roots sometimes swell up
irregularly due to storage of food such as Sweet potato.

Fasciculated Roots: It is like root tubers that swells
irregularly due to storage of food. But when the roots form a
fascicle or bunch and all the roots of the bunch swell up due

to storage of food, it is called fasciculated roots. Storage of
food is its main function, such as Aspasagus and Dahlia.

Nedulose Roots: For storage of food when roots swell up at
their tip, they are called nodulose roots such as Mango and Ginger.

Moniliform Roots: When adventitious roots swell and :
constrict alternately are called Moniliform roots, such as Fig- 3.6: Fasciculated Root
Bitter gourd, of Dahlia

Modified for Mechanical Support:

These roots help the plants to stand straight, to climb, or to
float in the water. For these reasons, adventitious roots are
modified variously such as prop roots, stilt roots, climbing
roots, floating roots etc.

—T WNodule Root

Fig- 3.7
Prop Roots: These types of roots grow from the stem of i
the branches and come down and enter into the soil. Finally
they become so thick that it looks like a pillar, such as
Banyan.

Stilt Roots:Few plants have weak stems and cannot stand
erect. So few roots develop from the lower part of the main
stem and tangentially reach the ground and grow, such as stilt
roots of Screw pine.

Climbing Roots: These roots grow from the nodal regions of Ws
weak stems and help the plants to climb clinging with another i.

Aa.

plani such as Betel vine. Fig: 3.9 ; Climbing Root
28 Science

stilt root: containes
nodes, inter nodes,
and leaves. it helps

plant te
stand erect

Fig-3.10: Prop root of banyan tree

Fig- 3.1L: Stilt root of keya
Modified for Performing Physiological Functions:

Besides the normal functions, adventitious
roots are modified to perform special
physiological functions.

Aerial Roots: One kind of root absorbs
moisture from the environment. They are called

Aerial Roots, such as Orchid.

Parasitic Roots or Sucking Roots: Parasitic plants
do not have chlorophyll. So, they push their special autophytic plant
type of roots inside the body of the host plant in ) i
search of food. It is called sucking or parasitic
roots such as Gold creeper.

stam of the host

sucking root:
i SUCKS

food from
ihe host

Respiratory Roots: Branch roots from the plant

main root come up from the saline and muddy soil [parasitic root

in coastal region, These roots have small pores on Fig- 3.13 : Parasitic coot in dodder
them. These modified roots are called
pnhumatophore or respiratory roots, such as Sundori,

Goran etc.

pneumatophor
mall pores help
in respiration

Reproductive Roots: Roots of some plants take
spart in reproduction, such as sweet potato,

Fig- 3,14: Poeumatophor

2025
2025

External morphology of plants 29

Lessons- 5— 7: Modified Stems

We know that the stems usually grow above the soil level
and bear leaves, flowers and fruits. But in exceptional
occasions for performing few special functions, stems
change their position and structure. These changes are
called modifications of stems. Based on position the stems

are of three types, such as — 1. Underground modified stem
2.Subaerial modified stem and 3. Aerial modified stem .

=! reproduchive
\, 44 root of teasle
»,

7 . curd (Kakrol
Underground modified stems: To survive from adverse Paes

conditions, storage of food and vegetative propagation,
stems of few plants grow beneath the soil surface. These
are underground modified stems. They are of four types,
such as Tuber, Rhizome, Bulb and Corm.

Tuber: Potatoes are the example of tuber. Tubers
bear nodes, inter nodes, scale leaves and auxiliary
buds. Cavities at the leaf axils of scale leaves are called
‘eyes’. In favourable conditions, axillary buds grow
from ‘eyes’ and give rise to new plants. Tubers are
round and swollen due to storage of food.

Rhizomes: Stems of Ginger, Turmeric etc. plants are

examples of rhizome. They grow parallel to soil surface
or erect and store foods. It bears clear nodes and ‘i iS
internodes, Scale leaves and roots at nodes, and buds at
ithe axils of scale leaves are found.

Bulbs: Stems of onion, garlic etc. are bulbs. Their stems juicy scale leaves
are very small and rounded and convex (elevated at the
middle), Nodes and internodes are compressed. Thick
and juicy scale leaves are so arranged that the bulb stem

. adventitious roots =i
cannot be seen. This stem produces profuse fibrous roots. %

Fig- 3.18: Bulb
30 Science

Corms: Amorphophallus (B.ol) is the example of
corm. This stem 1s very big and more or less rounded.
It bears prominent nodes and internodes. Buds from _/
the axils of scale leaves, grow laterally and give rise to
daughter corm. curved. Afterwards, new plants grow
trow the buds.

Sub Aerial Modified Stems :

‘ HY? adventitious root

Fig- 3.19: Comm

Plants, with soft stems (herbaceous stems), give rise to special branches. These
branches produce new plants through vegetative propagation. Some weak
stems lying on or under the soil surface, are called sub aerial modified stems.
They are of four types.

Runner: From the axiliary buds of lower nodes of Hydrocotvle
(B. Thankuni), Oxalis (B. Amruli), Cyrodon (Durba) plants give
rise to some weak stems called runner.

Stolon:These are special types of runners. From the base of
Arum (Man Kochu) grow some horizontal long branches. Nodes
of the branches give rise to some roots which attach with the — Fig-3.20: Runner
soil and the rest portion of the branch is a bit curved. Afterwants,

new plants grow from the buds. 48

Offset: Inter nodes of some aquatic plants like Pistia (B’ A '\)/)
Topapana) and Ficchornia (B. Kochuripana) are thick and short,
so the stems look dwarf. These are called offset. =

zr) t ; he
Sucker: Axiliary buds of Chrysenthemum Figs 45) Stolol
(B.Chandramallika), Bamboo (B. Bansh) grow laterally
beneath the soil surface and produce new plants.

Aerial Modified Stems:

These stems remain above the soil like normal stems but —=
they are modified to perform special functions like
synthesis of food, vegetative reproduction, self defense,
climbing etc. They are of four types.

Phylloclade: Cactus (B. Phonimonosha) is the example
of phylloclade. They are flat and green like leaves and
can manufacture food. Leaves of this stem are modified RAE SS ER
to spines and are used for self defense. Fig- 3.23: Sucker

2025
iy
oy
=
ey

External morphology of plants 31

Thorn: Sometimes axillary buds are modified into stout and sharp thorns
instead of developing as leaf buds. In wood apple (B. Bel), Lawsonia
(B. Mehendi), Maina Kata etc. plants develop sharp thorns.

Fig-3.24:Phylloclade = Fig-3.25: Stemiendrils = Fig-3.26: Thorns Fig-3.27: Bulbil

Stem tendril: Passion flower, Harjora etc. climbers develop thread like thin and
spiral long structures which are called stem tendrils.

Bulbils: In some climbers, axiliary buds do not develop as branches but store
food & become rounded ball like structure which are called bulbils, such as
Dioscoria (B. Chupri aloo ).

Lesson-8: Modified Leaves

To perform special functions leaves change their normal structure. Now, we will
know about modified leaves.

a) Leaf Tendrils: Apex of leaf or whole leaflets are sometimes modified
into a spring like structure called leaf tendril. With these tendrils plants
can cling to some support. In wild pea such structures are found.

Bud

. pitcher pliant
Fig- 3.28: Bryophyllum Fig-3.29: Tendml Fig-3.30: Scale Leaves Fig -3.31: Fly trap Fig-3.32: Spine leaf

b) Storage of Foods: Leaves of Onion, garlic and Alve vera are thick and
juicy. These plants store foods.
32

d)

e)

Science

Fly Traps :Pitcher plant is a climber and dodder is an aquatic plant,
whose leaves are modified to pitcher or bags. When insects enter inside the
pitcher, the lid of the pitcher is clased and the plants absorb juice from the
insect body.

Reproductive Leaves: In few plants buds grow from the margins of
leaves. Gradually these buds develop roots and ultimately when detached from
the leaf, become independent plants, such as Bryaphyllum (B. Patharkuchi),

Leaf Spines: Leaves are sometimes modified to spines, such as Lemon.

Scale Leaves: Sometimes underground stems develop scale like leaves,

such as potato, ginger, turmeric etc. These are scale leaves. Juicy scale leaves
store foods and protects the epical buds. such as juicy scale leaves of onion.

I

Group Work:
. Group discussion and presentations on the importance of modified
adventitious roots.

2. Presentation of the importance of modified stem in our practical life on

poster paper.

3. Presentation of importance of leaf modifications with reasons.

What we learned from this chapter-

> Ginger and potatoes are modified stems.
* Stems and leaves may be modified to thorns, spines or tendrils.

» Roots, stems and leaves are modified for storage of foods, performing
physiologic functions, reproduction ete.

» Modified roots, stems and leaves play many important roles in human life.

EXERCISE

Fill in the blanks:

1. Sweet potato is a modified
2, Turmeric is a modified

3. Cactus is a modified

4. Water is carried from roots to leaves by
5, Main function of leaf is

Short answered questions:

1. Why are potatoes not roots?

Whether the body of a cactus is stem or leaf- explain.
Mention the reasons why leaves are modified.
Mention the special functions of stems.

What are the reasons of root modifications?

bas be

2025
External morphology of plants 33

Multiple choice questions:

1. In which plant Moniliform roots are found?

a. Dahlia b.Mango ginger
c. Sweet Potato d. Bitter Gourd

2. Characteristics of Rhizome are —
i, Definite nodes and internodes,
ii. Nodes and internodes are compressed.
ili, Stay in horizontal position under the soil.

Which one of the following is correct?
a. i andi
b. 1 and iti
c. itand iii
d. i, ii and iii
Now follow the stem and answer question number 3 and 4.
3, Functions of M_ marked structure —
i. Store foods
il. Protect axillary buds
ii. Help in reproduction
Which one of the following 1s correct?
a.iand i= obi and tii c.ii and ii dvi, andi

4. From which parts of the stems seedlings grow’?

a. M and N b. Nand O
c. O and P d, MandP

Creative questions:

Forma-45, Science, Clags-7
34 Science

a) What is a bulbil?

b) How does reproduction occur through leaves in Bryophyllum?
c) Explain the practical use of X.

d) Compare and discuss the characteristics of ¥ and Z.

2.

What is an offset?

Why is pitcher plant called insect trap? Explain.
Explain the necessity of the part M in the first diagram,
Compare the plants R and N.

aogoe

Do yourself:

Collect Chili plant, grass, a piece of ginger, a piece of turmeric, Oxalis plant,
weak stems of arum, cactus and thorn of wood apple. Write down the names
of stem and nature of these collected plant parts with reasons,

2025
