Chapter Six
Structure of Matter

In different spheres of our daily life, we use or keep in touch with various
types of objects or matters like air, water, iron, foods, books, chalk ete.
Some of them are elements, some are compounds and some of them are mixture
of various matters. Do you know by what a matter is composed of or what the
structures of those matter are and how they are made of ?

ita’

wes
ha Mtnite tn Ht,

3

+?
‘
+
x
x
:
€

hes

After studying this chapter, we will be able —

> to explain the structure of matter.
> to differentiate between atom and molecule.

> to differentiate among elements, compounds and mixtures.

® to identify the selected elements and compounds by using symbol and formula.

% to demonstrate the use of water as universal solvent.

2025
2025

Structure of matter 61

Lesson 1-2 : Constituent of Matter

In our surrounding we always see different types of matter, such as books, food,
chairs, tables, water, air, soil, etc. We use some of this matter in various
purposes. We use water in washing our hands and face getting up from sleep in
the morning. This water is a matter. Likewise, sugar, salt, iron, copper, etc. are
also matter. What are the constituents of these matters or what are they made of?

What is the reason for the variation of matter?

The main reason for the variation of matter is its constituents. Besides, the
structure of matter also determines its properties. Different constituents and
structures lead to different appearances of matter. According to properties,
different matters are used in different purposes.

Now let us take what some of our most commonly used matter are made of. Let
us first consider iron and copper. We use iron in different purposes. A piece of
iron is basically made up of small iron particles. Same goes for copper. It is made
of tiny copper particles. When iron

is broken. only tiny particles of iron
are obtained. That is, only one y) cy) Cy)
element exists in iron. Similarly, Cu) Cy) Cy)

when copper is broken, only tiny

particles of copper are obtained. Cu) Cu) Cu)

And copper also has only one

6.1: Particles of iron and copper are
element.

arranged in a regular pattern

The matters that are made of only one component like iron and copper is called
element.

Like iron and copper, our known hydrogen and oxygen are also made
of only one component and they are elements as well.

leeds ao Ca (3)
Se 8688

Fig 6.2: Tiny particles of hydrogen and oxygen are not arranged in a regular pattern.
62 Science

@@o39
— 9399

Fig- 6,2: Hydrogen and Oxygen.

Salt and sugar are the two most essential matters of our daily life, Salt is a matter
which is made of two different components named sodium and chlorine Sugar is
made of three different components named carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.

lf we start to break salt or sodium chloride, the large particles of salt will turn
to small particles, that small particles will become smaller and then smallest, it
will no longer be seen with bare eyes. Though it is a small molecule of salt, there
is one sodium chloride in it. Sodium and chlorine will be found by breaking
the molecule, That means, two different molecules will be found.

S$) fv) Fig- 6,3: Normal Salt,

Similarly, if sugar breaks, three different components will be found.
The matter that is made of more than one component of different properties like
salt and sugar 1s called compounds.

Who does not know about rusting on iron? If dark grey-coloured iron
made red (which is an element) is kept outside for some days, red/brown
coloured layer named rust will be seen. Actually with the presence of vapour,
an element (iron) conducts reaction with another element named oxygen and
creates rust which is a compound called iron oxide. It can therefore be said
undoubtedly that, a compound substance consists of two or more elements,

Mixtures: Stir a glass of water by adding some salt into it. Such substance
with salt and water is made of more than one matter which is called mixture.
Similarly, air is also a mixture where different matters like nitrogen, oxygen,
vapour etc. exist. It is also noticeable here that, air is such a mixture where
both the matter: element and compound exist. On the other hand, both water
and salt that exist in the mixture are called compounds.

2025
2025

Structure of matter 63

Lesson 3: Smallest Particle Theory

In the previous lesson, we have seen that, if we continue breaking elements
and compound, it will turn into small particles. Over the time scientists and
philosophers had proposed different theories on these small particles. During 400
BC the first theory on small particles of matter was given by Greek philosopher
Democritus. According to him, every matter is made of some small indivisible
particles (which cannot be broken anymore). He called such small particles Atom.
The word atom came from the Greek word A4fomos which means indivisible or
things that cannot be broken. During that time, two contemporary philosophers
of Democritus named Plato and Aristotle stood against the theory. According to
Aristotle, matters are continuous and they have no limit of division. That means,

if breaking continues, the particles will become smaller and smaller,

During 1803, John Dalton, an English scientist, gave a theory based on
the experimented information on small particles of matter. This theory is called
Dalton’s Atomic Theory. According to Dalton-

1. Elements are made of extremely small particles called atoms.

2. All the atoms of an element are same. The atoms of an element are
identical in size, mass and chemical properties.

3. Atoms of one element are different from other elements. That means,
atoms of different elements differ in size, mass and other properties.

4. Compounds are made of more than one element. Atoms of different
elements combining in simple whole-number ratios form compounds.

5. In chemical reactions, atoms cannot be created or destroyed. Only
they are joined with and separated from each other.

Lesson 4 and 5

We have learnt from the Dalton's atomic theroy that matters consist of small
particles. These small particles are known as atoms. Atoms cannot stay free or
independent. They form molecules by combining each other. A molecule can stay
free or independent.

In case of elements, only atoms of the same substance combine together and
form molecules. For example, two Oxygen atoms combine to form an Oxygen

“"O+O—> ES

Oxygen atoms Fig-6.4 Oxygen molecule
64 Science

In other words, an element named Oxygen is made up of small molecules.
If we break down an oxygen molecule, we will get two oxygen atoms.

Fig : 6.4: Oxygen gas in a container. Individual Oxygen molecules are
staying free from each others,

Now, let us consider a compound named water. Take some water in a
container. Divide them into small parts. Assume that we now have a single
drop of water. This single drop of water, in fact, consists of numerous small
particles. If we continue to break down the single drop, we will get a single
particle which can stay alone and free. Such a particle contains all the properties
of water. This particle is a molecule of water.

Seo.

2&
ome
re

Fig- 6.6: water is in fact an aggregate of water molecules.

If we breakdown a water molecule, we will get smaller particles. However, they
cannot stay free or independent. They do not contain any properties of water.
They, in fact, are no longer water particles. They are atoms of two different
elements- one oxygen atom and two hydrogen atoms. In other words, one
oxygen atom and two hydrogen atoms combine to form a water molecule.

2025
Structure of matter 64

ay | + @+@)

104.5°

Oxygen atom Hydrogen atom Oxygen atom Hydrogen atoms
Fig- 6.7

Work: Find some objects of spherical shape. Make models of water and

oxygen molecues from these objects with the help of sticks. Hydrogen atoms

form a 104.5° angle with oxygen atom.

So, did you understand the relationship and differences between atoms and
molecules?

Matters, consist of small particles, named atoms. They cannot stay free or
independent. Two or more atoms form molecules by combining with each
other. Two or more identical atoms combine and form a molecule of an
element. Atoms of two or more elements combine to form a molecule of a
compound, A molecule can remain free or independent.

Lesson 6: Atom and Symbol

From the previous lesson. you came to know that atoms differ from elements
io elements. Now the question is how many elements are there or what types of
atoms are there? Till now 118 elements have been invented, among them 98 is
found in nature and the rest of 20 is artificially made elements. Every element
has a name. To express them shortly and easily, we use symbols for each of
them. Generally, symbols are expressed by the first one or two letters of the
Latin, Greek or English name of the elements. In case of expressing symbols
with one letter, capital letter is used. In case of expressing symbols with two
letters, the first one will be in capital letter and the second one will be in small
letter.

Forma-9, Science, Class-7
66 Science

Some symbols of atoms and their English, Greek or Latin names are given below.

Atom Symbol English, Greek or Latin name
Hydrogen H Hydrogen
Helium He Helium
Lithium La Lithium
Beryllium Be Beryllium
Boron B Boron
Carbon Cc Carbon
Nitrogen N Nitrogen
Oxygen oO Oxygen
Fluorine F Florine
Iron Fe Ferrum (iron)

Lesson 7- 8 : Molecule and Formula

We have learned that molecules are made of combining two or more atoms.
From the formulae it can be learnt which atoms a molecule contains.

A formula is, in fact, a short expression of a molecule. A formula is written
with the symbols of the atoms that form the molecule. Now we will know
about the rules of writing formulae and what a formula tells us. Note that the
term 'formulae' is the plural form of formula.

Formulae for elements: Generally, numerous atoms in solid and liquid elements
stay together; they do not form any molecules. Therefore, there are no formulae
for such elements, such as sodium, copper and iron. For most of the gaseous
elements, two elements combine together to form a molecule. Therefore, the
formulae of such elements are written by writing their symbols with 2 as
subscript. For example, the formula of oxygen is Oj and the formula of nitrogen
is Nz, Two atoms form molecules in some liquid and solid elements as well, Their
formulae are also written by writing their symbols with 2 as subscript. For
example, the formula of bromine (liquid) is Br; Formulae of some elements
are given in the following table:

2025
a
=
om

Structure of matter

67

Element Symbol Molecular Formulae
Hydrogen H Hp

Nitrogen N Np

Oxygen 8) QO;

Fluorine FE Fy

Chlorine Cl Ch

Bromine Br Br

lodine I I,

Formulae of Compounds

From a formula of a compound we know which elements or group of atoms and
their ratio the compound is made of from. For example, H,0 tells us that a
molecule of water is formed from two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom.
From the following table, we will see how formulae of compounds tell us about
the atoms and group of atoms that form molecules of the compounds.

Characteristics of

Formulae Name Atoms and group of atoms’
Compounds’ name that form the molecule
Compounds' name ends NaCl Sodium chloride Sodium and Chlorine
with -ide when it is formed} CaO Calcium oxide Calcium and Oxygen

with a metal, the
compound's name ends
with-ite or-ate,

from a metal (sometimes a | Kl Potassium todide Potassium and Iodine
nonmetal) and a nonmetal. | SO, Sulfur dioxide Sulfur and Oxygen

CO; Carbon dioxide Carbon and Oxygen
Sometimes a nonmetal and} CaSO, | Calcium Sulfate Calcium and Sulfate
a number of oxygen atoms) CaSO; | Calcium Sulfite Calcium and Sulfite
form a group of atoms KNO; Potassium Nitrate Potassium and Nitrate
which acts like a single KNO; Potassium Nitrite Potassium and Nitrite
atom. When such group of | Na;(COQ;)) Sodium Carbonate — [Sodium and Carbonate
atoms forms a compound | AIPO, | Aluminium Phosphate| Aluminium and Phosphate

you will learn the rales how to write the formulae of compounds in the next class.
68 Science

Lesson 9: Particles of Atom

Atoms are small in size. They are so small that we cannot see them in empty
eyes. Not even with the help of microscope. But with the help of electron
microscope atoms can be seen. Here it is mentionable that with the help of
electron microscope, we can have a several million times of large view of an
object.

Now the question is, can too smallest particle be found by breaking so small
atoms? According to Dalton's atomic theory, atoms are indivisible, that means,
it cannot be divided. This opinion was widely recognized by everyone for a long
period. But now it has been proved that atoms can be divided into many small
particles. Three particles can be got from dividing atoms. They are: electron,
proton and neutron. In modem research it has been proved that neutron and
proton exist in the centre of atoms and electron moves around the centre in the
circular orbit. Generally a same type of atom consists of equal numbers of
electron and proton.

It is notable here that only the atom of hydrogen does not have any neutron
at its centre, which means if an atom of hydrogen is broken, a proton at the
centre and electron outside the centre will be found. On the other hand, there
are two protons and neutrons at the centre and two electrons outside of the
atom of helium. And there are eight protons and eight neutrons at the centre
and eight electrons outside of the atom of oxygen.

electron

&p

Hydrogen Helium Oxygen

Fig- 6.8 : Structure of atom

2025
2025

Structure of matter 69

Lesson 10 — 11: Use of Water as Universal Solvent:

In class six, you came to know that water is a universal solvent. Because
it can dissolve any organic or inorganic substance that other solvent cannot.
Now, let’s observe whether water is really a universal solvent or not.

Work: Demonstration of the use of water as a universal solvent.

Necessary Equipment: water, test-tube, different types of matter (for
example: common salt, eating soda, testing salt, bit salt, copper sulphate, sugar,
vinegar, spirit, vitamin C tablet, glucose etc.)

Method: Take about 5 millimeter of water in a test-tube. Shake tt well by
adding some eating salt. Have the salt dissolved in water? Yes, exactly. Now
take each and every substance mentioned above and observe whether those
dissolved in the water or not. Every substance or matter is dissolving,
From the mentioned substance normal salt, eating soda, testing salt, bit
salt, copper sulphate are the m-organic substance but sugar, vinegar, spirit,
vitamin C tablet, glucose are organic substance. So it is proved that water can
dissolve organic and innorganic substance. That means water is a universal
solvent.

Now, take another solvent like spirit instead of water and take the above
mentioned substance. See if they are dissolved or not. Are all the substances
dissolving in spirit?

No, they are not. Maximum solvent can dissolve a litthke number of substances
except water. So they are not universal solvent.

What we learned from this chapter-

Different matters have different structures. So their properties are also different.
Elements are made of same types of components.

Compounds are made of more than one element.

Elements are made of small particles named atom.

Atoms of different elements differ in size, mass, and other properties.

Atoms of different elements combine in simple whole-number ratios to

¥YvYvVW¥Y¥ WV

form compounds.
The smallest particle of compounds is called molecule.

v
70 Science

» Electron, proton and neutron are found by dividing atoms.

EXERCISE
Fill in the blanks
1. Elementsare made of component.
2. Salt and sugar are
3. The smallest particle of elements is called
4. is the smallest particle of compounds.
5. There is at the centre of the atom.

Short answered questions

1. What do element and compound mean?

2. Explain the difference between atom and molecule with examples.

3. What are the main themes of Dalton’s atomic theory?

4. What particles can be found by dividing atom? Where are they located

in the atom?

Multiple choice questions

1. Which one is the molecule of elements?

a. H b. Ne c. N d. NO

Give the answer to the question no. 2 and 3 according to the following stem:

Matter Symbol Formula
1 Ch
2 Al
3 O;
4 Br:
5 NH;
6 NaQH
7 Cu

2025
2025

Structure of matter Tl

2. Which are the substances of same properties showed through symbols

and formula from the above table?

a. 2,4
b. 1,3
c. 4
d. 2.6
Which substances have equal atomic number?
a. 2,3
b. 3,4
c. 45
d. 3,6

Creative question:

1.

Three matters and their atomic numbers are mentioned in the following table.
Matter Number of atoms
1 Na - 1
CI-1
Z F-2
3 C-1
O-2

a. What is the symbol of Helium?
b. Why is coal an element? Describe.
c. Write the chemical name of number 1 matter with the formula and

explain its structure.

d. Number 2 of the table is an element and Number 3 is a compound.
Explain.
72 Science

a. What is atom?
b. What is the difference between O and O2,
c. Putting the required electron in the second orbit, draw a diagram.

d. Give reasons in favour of the diagram that you have drawn.

2025
