Chapter Seven

The Use of Energy

In our daily life. we are involved in many works. Work is related to energy and
power. Besides, there are different types of energy and its process from one state
to another. In addition, there are renewable and non-renewable energy. We have
to search for the alternative source of energy in order to solve the crisis of energy.

After studying this chapter, we will be able—

> toexplain energy and work.

> toexplain different forms of energy

> to analyze the correlation among energy transformation.

> toexplain the advantage and limitation of renewable energy
> to explain the limitation of non-renewable energy

> to explain the sources of renewable energy.

> toexplain the conservation of energy.

> to explain the way of elimination of energy crisis.

® todescribe the necessity of energy in our life.

> tobe conscious and make others conscious regarding the use of energy.

Forma-10, Science, Class-7
74 Science

Lesson 1: Work, Power and Energy

Let’s take a look at the following pictures.

Fig- 7.1: Astudent is pushing Fig-7.2: A boy is playing football — Fig-7.3: Person standing bearing load
the wall over head

What are you thinking after seeing the above pictures? In the first picture, the
student is pushing the wall. Is she really domg any work? In the second picture,
someone is playing football. Is he working? And in the third picture: Is the man,
standing with load over his head doing some work? Generally, each of the above
examples seems individually a work. But scientifically work means something
more. In an easy term, when a displacement is happened by applying force on an
object is called work. So, it is found from the above examples that the student
who is pushing the wall or the man who is standing bearing load over his head is
not working because no displacement happened. So scientifically no work is
taking place in these two cases. Here he, who is playing football, has changed his
position and football too, so he is working. We can say, in the language of
science that if force is applied to an object and the object changes from one
position to another towards the force, work happens. There are two things
related to work, one is force and another is the change of position. In The
language of science, work is the multiplication of force and distance passed by
the object.

Arickshaw puller has to work in order to go from one place to another. In other
case, a rickshaw pullar needs 10 minutes to go from one place to another and
another needs 15 minutes to pass the same distance. Who works more between
these two persons? Power is related to doing work quickly. The rate at which
work is done is called power. Ifa rickshaw puller takes less time to go to a place,
he uses more power. That means if we multiply total work by total time, we get

power.

2025
2025

The use of energy 75

We can cite another example related to work. Two students decided to move
around the playground of the school for five times. After some times of starting,
it is found that one of them has stopped moving finishing two rounds and
another one has finished five rounds. Now, we will consider the ability of doing
work. The student who has finished two rounds was lost the ability and the
student who has finished five rounds has more ability. Scientifically, this capaci-
ty for doing work is called energy. Here, we have found that energy is directly
related to work. Actually Work and Energy are not different thing. We need
energy in order to do work. He who has more energy can do more work. This
energy is measured by work. So, the unit of Work and Energy is same. The unit
of Energy is Joule.

Lesson 2-3: Different forms of Energ

Where do we get energy which is necessary in order to make us eligible for
doing work? We all know that the sun is the ultimate source of energy. Besides
this, we have so many sources around us. As for example, you must see cooking
by using natural gas. Again, you have seen how oil is used as fuel. Actually, in both
the cases we use gas or oil in order to produce energy. Now, we will talk about
different sources of energy.

Mechanical Energy

Suppose you are running or driving a car. You have to work for retrieving speed.
Again you release a brick from top to down or are trying to pick a mango by
catapult. Here when you moved up the brick the energy stored into it. Ifthe brick
is released, it continues to fall down and gains kinetic energy. This energy comes
from the transformation of stored energy. And the catapult you moved back,
stored energy into it and the stone of it attacked the mango. So there is a relation
of running, dtiving a car, moving up a brick or picking mango by catapult with
certain energy. This special kind of energy is called Mechanical Energy.
Although static energy and kinetic energy are related here separately, working
for the capacity of speed is called Kinetic Energy. For example, running or
energy of a moving car. Again energy stored for the change of special state from
another is called Static Energy. Such as, moving up a brick or energy stored ina
catapult.

Chemical Energy

Energy stored in food or fuel is called Chemical Energy. We get necessary heat
and kinetic energy required for our body from chemical energy stored in
food through respiration. Petrol, Gas, Wood and Coal all of them have chemical
76 Science

energy into them. Chemical energy exists in the batteries which we use inside
torch light or radio.

Thermal Energy

Energy which is used for cooking, running motor car or train, is called thermal
energy. We may get this energy by burning coal, gas, wood, petrol or diesel. Again,
we get heat directly from the sun. And this thermal energy keeps the earth
warm, No animal or plants could live without thermal energy.

Magnetic Energy

Another form of energy is magnetic energy. Magnet attracts ironic substance
using this energy.

Light Energy

Another kind of energy which comes from the sun with thermal energy is light
energy. We could not see anything without light energy. The sun is the main
source or light energy. We get light energy by burning fire and switching the
electrical light on.

Sound Energy

We produce another form of energy when we speak, sing or play a flute. This is
called sound energy, We can hear each other with the help of sound energy,
Sound energy is used in telephone, radio and television. Sound ts also produced
from the vibration of substance.

Electrical Energy

A very well-known and necessary form of energy is electrical energy. Light is
switched on, fan is moved, and industry is run by electricity. Train is also run
by electricity in many countries. Electrical energy can be transmitted from one
place to another with the help of wire.

Atomic Energy

We know that matter is composed of atom. The inner content of this atom is
bound together by a very powerful force. If this binding can be broken by any
means, then a very powerful energy called atomic energy is obtained. We may
get nuclear energy by applying force and separate the elements from atom.
This energy can be transmitted into electrical energy and is used in our work.

2025
2025

The use of energy rife

Lesson 4 and 5: Transformation of Energy

We knew earlier that energy exits into different forms in this universe and these
states are related to each other. Let us see the following pictures.

Pic | Pic 2 Fig 74 Pic 3 Pic 4

According to the above pictures after having various foods, energy of weight lifter
turns into chemical energy from food. Later on, when he is trying to lift the
weight, stored chemical energy turns into kinetic energy. After that, when he is
gradually lifting the weight over his head, kinetic energy is turning into static
energy. Again, when he is throwing down the weight, static energy has turned
into motion, sound and thermal energy. Because, sound is produced by falling
down the weight on the ground and it feels warm when someone touches the

weight. So, there are different transformation of energy that happen inside our
physiological activities.

Thus, different forms of energy are related to each other. In fact, every
phenomena of nature may be considered as transformation of energy. Some
examples of energy conversion are as follows:

Conversion of Mechanical Energy

It feels warm when you rub skin with hand. Mechanical
energy turns into thermal energy in this case. Again.
mechanical energy turns into sound energy if flute is
played. If a stone is hit with a metallic bar, it seems
sparks coming out from there and also makes sound.
Metallic bar and stone are felt warm. In this case,
mechanical energy turns into thermal, sound and optical
energy. When paddy is processed using a husking-pedal,
mechanical energy is turned into sound and thermal fig 7.5; swinging
energy. Similarly, conversion of static and kinetic energy

happens during swinging.

7& Science

Conversion of Thermal Energy

In steam engine energy is produced by heat and
using that energy train runs. Thermal energy
turns into mechanical energy here as well.

Conversion of Light Energy

: . Fig-7.6; Raihvay Engine
Thermal energy turns into chemical energy . one

when it works on photographic paper. The sun

light is converted into electrical energy through solar pannel. Besides, various
kinds of electronic machines such as pocket calculator, radio, electric watch use
solar energy by converting it into electricity.

Fig-7_7: Digital Camera Fig-7.8: Calculator Fig-7.9: Solar Panel

Conversion of Sound Energy

Clothes are cleaned by using vibration of
sound. Sound energy turns into mechanical
energy in this case. Again sender machine of a
telephone or radio turns sound energy into
electricity,

Conversion of Magnetic Energy

Heat is produced when iron is magnetized or
demagnetized. Here magnetic energy turns
into thermal energy. Beside this, we can pick
up heavy loads using electro magnet. Here,
magnetic energy turns into mechanical energy,

Fig-7.11: Electric Tron

2025
rs
=
a

The use of energy 79

Conversion of Electrical Energy

Heat produced when electricity passes from iron machine. Here electrical energy
turns into heat energy. The electric fan moves when electricity passes
through it. Here electrical energy turns into mechanical energy. We get electrical

light from the electrical energy.

Conversion of Chemical Energy

Heat is produced when coal is burned, It also may be
happened by chemical reaction. Chemical energy
turns into thermal energy in this case. Usually,
electricity is produced by the reaction of chemical hee
elements in an electric cell. Besides this, thermal and

optical energy conversion happens from chemical

energy by burning coal, petrol, kerosene or gas .

Pa

Fig-7.12: Gas Stove
Conversion of Atomic Energy

In a nuclear power plant nuclear energy is primaryly transformed into thermal
energy. Thermal energy is transformed into mechanical energy by turning turbines.
Later mechanical energy is transformed into electrical energy by a generator.

Lesson- 6: Energy Conservation

Suppose, you threw tennis ball upward standing on school ground. What
are you seeing? The tennis ball is moving down after going up to a fixed
height. When the tennis ball is going up, its kinetic energy decreases and static
energy increases. When the kinetic energy will be 0, the ball will be moving
down because of its static energy into it. We have found that the more the
object goes down, the more its static energy turns into kinetic energy. When the
ball touches the ground and remains steady, it’s all static energy and kinetic
energy turns into sound, thermal, optical etc. energy, We could not get any proof
of heat or light. But when the ball touches the ground, we hear the sound. But
sometimes if we throw stone instead of tennis ball, it may feel hot.

All of you were informed of how energy transforms one state to another, One
question may arise in your mind that, does any energy waste during this
transformation? It is amazingly true that total amount of energy is equal before
the transformation or after. In fact, we are not capable of creating new energy,
even though we cannot destroy energy. This means total amount of energy is
equal in the universe. The universe holds the equal amount of energy at
present that it held during its creation. This is called conservation of energy.
80 Science

Lesson 7 - 9: Renewable Energy

We get energy from the various sources of energy. There are two types of
sources: renewable and non-renewable. You can find out the meaning easily
from the name renewable. It means what we renew and the way of renew.
In this regards we can produce energy by an object and we can reuse the
object in order to produce energy again. That means, the sources of energy
which we can use again and again is called renewable energy. Among them,
sunray, biogas, water, air flow, ebb and flow tide of water etc. are mentionable.

We will get an idea about biogas, solar energy, ebb and flow tide of water
and the production of renewable energy form the airflow from below.

Biogas

Excrement of cows, goats, horses and bulls are used as fuel from long ago.
Such excrements of animals are the source of energy. Thermal energy is produced
by burning dry dung in many countries of the world. The excrements from
cows, pigs and hens, crops and plants are mostly used as the elements of biogas.
In this case you can use only the plant elements or animal fertilizer mixture or
both. The raw straw mixed with excrements from the place of pig or hens
are the great mixture of animal or plant fertilizer to make biogas. But to use it,
we have to take small pieces of it. In this case we have to remember that the dry
plant excrements should be cut into small pieces to bring out the cover before

using it. And the fresh plants should be kept outside to get rotten for at least ten
days.

Air Flow

Aboriginal people were afraid of air, People are using the flow of air in different
work because of the advancement of civilization and science. Ancient people
used to make circles with four-five fans and used to move it through the flow
of air, Bringing water from well, irrigation of agriculture, breaking barley or
wheat, thread out sugarcane, cutting paddy, cutting straw etc. were used to do by
the ancients by using the rubbing of circle. After that people had done difficult
task like splitting wood by using air. People in many regions of the world
had used machines of big circles, which is called windmills now-a-days.
Electricity is being produced in many countries by using windmill.

2025
The use of energy 81

Ebb and Tidal Flow of Water

The use of machines with the help of ebb and flow of water energy has been
innovated earlier. But transforming the ebb and flow of water energy into
electrical energy is not an old concept. Now-a-days, electricity has been
produced by using ebb and flowing energy of water in various countries.

Solar Energy

The energy which we get from the sun is called solar energy. We know that the
sun is the source of all energy. The energy all over the world has come from
the sun or sunrays in anyways, For example, fossil fuel of modern civilization
is mainly solar energy of several years.

Work: Solar Energy production

Necessary equipment: Magnifying glass /metal disc

Procedure: At first take a magnifying glass.
Usually magnifying glass has convex lens. Focus
sunray ona piece of paper using the lens. You will
find fire flame up, if you focus the lens correctly.

Besides this, solar energy is used in order to make the house warm in the cold
countries. Solar energy is also used to dry crop, fish and vegetables. Dry fish
can be saved for a long time. Vapour can be produced in boiler using solar
energy and this is used for moving the turban in order to produce electricity.
Solar cell has been made by using modern technology. The characteristic of
solar cell is: we directly get electricity when sunray falls upon it. Solar cell has
many other uses too. Example: Solar cell is used to supply electricity in satellite.

Merits of Renewable Energy- Perspective of Bangladesh

There are so many merits of using renewable energy. Demand of energy ts
increasing with the increase of population, so renewable energy is essential now.
Biogas is used as clean fucl among them. Biogas helps to get high quality
organic manure which is helpful for unpolluted environment. It also helps
to keep hygienic and clean environment. Many electronic machines, such

Forma-11, Science, Class-7
82 Science

as pocket calculator, pocket radio, electronic watch is run by solar energy.
Basically, the important merit/main opportunity of renewable energy is that it is
renewable. This kind of energy never ends. The merits are as follows:

A Airflow and the sun are unlimited source of energy because they
will exist about four billion years more.

4. More energy can be produced by using water flow. In this regard the
bridge made for resisting water flow develops road networking. As
the moon influences ebb-tide of water and its happens regularly, we
can use energy produced from ebb-tide of water as renewable energy.

4 Renewable energy is always environment friendly, because they do not
increase CO, in the alr.

This energy is very much necessary in our country and it is available also.
There are many areas in our country where people have not got electricity yet. In
that case we can get solar energy easily. We have huge possibility in biogas
production. We must look for alternative source of energy as we have limited
amount of natural gas. The expenditure of supplying natural gas from one
place to another is very high. If we develop biogas plant, we may get double
opportunities. We will be able to fulfill the demand of essential fertilizer as
well as the demand of necessary energy. It is easy to get biogas element in our
agriculture- based country undoubtedly. Therefore, we have to take proper
initiatives in order to manage this kind of energy for the future.

Renewable Energy: Limitations

It has big demand and interest at present. But there are some demerits of
using renewable energy. These are described as follows:

e Electricity getting from biogas is limited quantity.

* Sources of air and water flow for renewable energy are limited. Because
the plant needs suitable place to develop. The main problem of producing
energy from wind is that air flow does not exist always.

e We may get renewable energy based on solar energy if sunrays are
available. But rain may interrupt here.

e Sometimes water flow of river may change its way of flow because of
using ebb and tide to produce renewable energy. Besides this, it may
interrupt the movement of ship by building bridge or barrage over the river.

« Renewable energy produced from sun, air and water flow is expensive,

fe
oS
my
2025

The use of energy 33

Lesson 10: Non-Renewable Energy

Non Renewable energy means if we use this kind of energy once from a source,
we can not produce more energy from that source. Basically this is natural
resource which we cannot produce more than once, This kind of energy is spent
within short time that they are produced. Coals, oil, natural gas, nuclear energy
like Uranium etc. are some examples among them,

Merits of non-renewable Energy

It may consider the merits of renewable energy from two sides, price and
availabity. Most of the vehicles and machines which are run by renewable
energy need more expense if they use non-renewable energy. Such as: the
vehicles run by natural gas or oil/petrol require low cost. On the other hand,
it is difficult and expensive to run a vehicle using renewable energy sources
such as: solar energy. Non-renewable energy is cheap; we may get more energy
from less quantity of elements. As for example, large amount of electricity can
be produced from less Uranium in a nuclear reactor.

Limitations of non-renewable Energy:

Demerits of non-renewable energy are-
* The energy is non-renewable and finished frequently.
* It pollutes environment at large scale.
* Carbon di oxide spread out by its burning that causes global warming ,

Lesson 11: The Use and Crisis of Energy

Energy is necessary for what man does for his development and living.
Consumption of energy is increasing day by day which creates the crisis. Crisis
of energy causes for the following reasons:

e More energy is required to meet the demand of increasing population.

* Developing countries are building structures, roads, industries etc. and
using vehicles at a high rate. Energy is being used for construction
purpose and vehicle maintenance.

People are constructing luxurious buildings for better living. Energy
deficiency is caused due to using of radio, TV, VCR, air-conditioner
and so on at large scale.

® Business, communication and other activities of people are increasing

day by day. Energy is being used largely for this purpose.
R4 Science

Acuteness of energy occurs if we fail to supply necessary energy for all
above purposes. That is why we are looking for alternative energy.

Lesson 12: Searching of Alternative Source of Energy

Natural energy like oil, gas, coal, electricity is being used continuously till
now and thus going to be finished. Though atomic energy is coming out as
potential source, its initial costing is high. There are uncertainty and risks in case
of its supply.

Natural gas is our priceless asset. But this energy is not renewable. We cannot
depend on any kind of non-renewable energy source. There are consumption of
large amount of fuel which is used in order to cook food for 160 million people
in our country. Wood, dry straw, cow dung etc. are among them. These are helpful
in increasing fertility of soil. But the use of it as organic fertilizer is limiting as
it has been used in cooking. That is why, fertility of land is decreasing. Wood

is mostly used for cooking. This not only destroys forest resource but also
makes disaster for our environment.

Considering all these issues, we are looking for alternative energy source
continuously. Scientists have already invented biogas technology. They are
successful in case of solar energy use even partially. Solar energy, ocean
flow and wind energy are also individually found as energy source.

If biogas can be produced, we get electricity for fuel, light, run the TV in rural
areas. If this technology is adopted, the pressure on natural forest resource will
be reduced. Thus environmental balance can be maintained. We can produce
more crops by saving land fertility. After all, we can keep a beautiful and
clean environment for our next generation. So, necessity of adopting, developing
and taking care of biogas technology is very important.

Lesson 13: The Effect of Energy in Our Life and Its Cost Effective
Use

We have almost 160 million people in our country. A large number of fuel is
used tor cooking every year. Wood, dry straw. dry cow dung etc, are most of
them. That is why forest resources of our country is decreasing day by day,
fertility of land is lost and environment is going to be destroyed. Our birth rate
is high. We will be in trouble in order to fulfill the demand of increased
population. We have to think about acuteness of fuel. We are using energy in

2025
2025

The use of energy a5

every state in our life. Energy is needed in order live as well as to develop the
standard of our life. We have cannot move without energy. Therefore, energy is
very close to our life. We have found that fossil fuel is an important source of
energy. But this kind of energy is limited and finished once. That is why,
mankind is looking for alternative source of energy. Renewable energy is a
possible way to solve this problem. We have to be aware and frugal in case of
energy use before getting a large and new source of energy. Our ethical
responsibility is to prevent misuse of energy in our daily life. For this reason, we
need to take the following initiatives:

e Tocreate mind set up to consider energy as a whole rather than personal asset.

* Radio, TV, light, Air Condition should be switched on only when
necessary otherwise should keep switched off.

* More energy is needed for defected vehicle or machine. So, it is
important to maintain the machines properly.

e We should not run the engine of vehicles without any reason/necessity.

* Energy conservation’ energy saving decrease our personal expenditure.

New words from this chapter:

Work, Power and Energy, Solar energy, Energy conservation, Renewable energy,

Non-renewable energy, Biogas, Acuteness/Shortage of energy, Alternative energy
source,

What we learned from this chapter-

> Capability of doing work is energy.

> We have so many energy sources around us.

> Energy is not created or destroyed, it just can change its form from one
state to another.

Renewable energy is necessary for our country as well as easy to get.
Use of energy is increasing day by day, so it creates crisis of energy

¥WwW

Our ethical responsibility is to protect misuse and wastage of energy
in our daily life,
86 Science

Exercise

Fill in the blanks

1. of work is called energy.
2. Usually generator transforms energy into electricity.
3. Biogas is produced from and constituent.

Short answered questions

1. What is the difference between power and energy?

2. Explain that amount of energy remains unchanged.

3. Mention the reasons of energy crisis .

4. How can we get the benefits of non-renewable energy?

Multiple choice questions

1. Which one is the source of non-renewable energy?

a) Air b) Flow of water c) Solar Energy d) Coal

2. Sometimes Atish studies using a charger fan with light. In this regard he uses-
i) Light energy
il) Electrical energy

iti) Chemical energy
Which one is correct from the following?
a) iand ii b) ii and iii c) i and iii d) i, ti and iii
Answer the question no 3 and 4 according to the following stem:

A gymnast lifts the weight of 200 kg and keeps it down. Then after taking some
rest she/he is having food with listening music.

2025
2025

The use of energy 87

3. Which is the correct energy transformation serial from weight lifting to
keeping down?

a) Chemical energy — Kinetic energy — Static energy — Kinetic energy
b) Kinetic energy — Static energy — Kinetic energy — Sound energy

c) Static energy — Kinetic energy — Sound energy — Thermal energy
d) Kinetic energy — Static energy — Kinetic energy — Static energy

4. Which two of the energy are related to having food and listening music of the
weight lifter?

a) Heat and Sound
b) Heat and Electricity

c) Chemical and Sound
d) Static and Heat

Creative question

1. There is no electricity till now in Samiha’s village named Bijoynagar. That
is why many of the villagers use solar electricity. she went to Kaptai with
her uncle during last Eid vacation and found that electricity was being
produced from water also.

a) What is the main source of energy?

b) Why is natural gas non-renewable energy? Explain.

c) Explain the way of producing electricity from water seen by Samiha at Kaptai.

d) Discuss the suitability of the energy as mentioned in the stem used in Samiha’s
village.

2. Nowadays Mr. Mumin is producing one kind of gas from the excrement of
animal firms, He can sell extra gas after fulfilling the demand of his own firm.

a) What is power?

b) Describe the necessity of energy transformation.

c) Explain the nature of the source of energy of the gas produced by stimulator.
d) Analyze the importance of activities of Mr. Mumin regarding energy conservation,
