Chapter Eleven

Change in Surrounding and Various Incidents

In our surrounding different types of change have been occurring in every
moment. Some of them are essential for our survival and some of them can be
the reason of various harms for our life. These physical and chemical changes of
different matters have been occurring through this various incidents of nature.

After studying this chapter, we will be able—

> to explain physical and chemical change of various incidents of nature;
to realize the importance of preserving metal;
to show some practical application of chemical reaction and change;

¥ vw?

to be conscious in taking necessary safety measures in experimental
activities and to make others conscious; and

v

to use the equipments appropriately in experimental activities.

2025
2025

Changing in surrounding and various incidents 123

Lesson 1: Melting and Boiling

Wrok: Wait for sometimes afier keeping some ice
cubes in a small pot. What is happening? The ice is
turning into water by melting gradually. Well, now tell,
are water and ice the same matter or different? Water
and ice are the same matter, they are not different.
The states are different only. While it is in the form of
water, it is liguid and while it is in the shape of ice, it
is solid.

Fig- 11.1: Glass with ice

The change of state where ice turns to water is called physical change.

What happen if water is heated? The temperature of water increases and the
water starts to boil at a certain point. Is boiling point of water physical change?
Yes, obviously it is a physical change, because it turns into water from liquid to
gaseous state, even it does not turn into a new substance and its property remains
unchanged.

Again, if you cut a big paper into small pieces,
will it a physical change? Yes, it will be a

physical change as well, because of that the

paper only turns into small pieces but it QS —
remains the same substance and its property =

has not changed as well.
8 Fig- 11.2 : Paper sheet and pieces of paper

Thus the changes of matter which leads the transformation in the state or shape
but does not create a new substance and keeps the properties of matter
unchanged are called physical change.

Lesson 2: Decaying of Metal

All of you are well known about red made from iron. Rust occurs in iron rod if
it is kept outside for some days and gradually the rod becomes wear off. Do you
know what rust is and how is ti formed?
124 Science

Work: Take a pot containing half of water. Carefully drop the pin into the
water of that pot. Keep that pot for 2/3 days. Could you see any change in the
pin? Yes, there is rust at the surface of the pin.

What is the change called occurring in this iron? Is it a physical change? Here
ferric oxide has formed from the reaction of iron, oxygen and water. This water
mixed ferric oxide is called rust. Thus it can be observed that iron transforms
into a different substance called ferric oxide which has completely different
properties than iron.

Such changes where one or more than one substance transforms completely into
anew substance having different properties is called chemical change.

The rust comes off if it is rubbed. That means rust creates destruction in tron.

Similarly other metals like aluminum and copper decay if they are kept in air.
But some metals like gold, platinum do not decay in the open air. That is why
they are used in making ornaments and coin.

Lesson 3: Stainless Steel

Well, do you know what stainless steel is or whether rust is seen in it or not?

Stainless steel is prepared by mixing carbon, nickel and chromium with iron.
Mainly it is a mixture. Stainless steel is several times stronger and harder than
iron. Most inierestingly rust does not occur in it. Now let's confirm it from
experiment.

Work : Take two third of water in a pot and dive a
spoon made of stainless steel and a nail into it for
some days, Is there any rust in the spoon? No, there is
not because the property of iron in stainless steel is
different from original iron, so it cannot create rust by
reacting with oxygen and water. But nail creates rust
on it because it is made of iron. Fig- 11.3

Prepare a list of metalic stuffs used at home and observe which of them are
decaying gradually and which are not. Think the reason behind that.

If the metallic substances gradually decay, they will be unable to use. But if we
are conscious of using those with proper care, then it will be possible to prevent

2025
al
3
™

Changing in surrounding and various incidents 125

the deecay. For example: we can keep iron made stuffs like hammer, spike etc.
far from water in a dry space. It is possible to avoid the rust by steeping those in
oil or grease.

Now a question can be raised, what should be done to avoid rust in metals?

Galvanizing, painting and electroplating are some ways to avoid rust in metals.
Now let's be acquainted with them,

Galvanizing: In our daily life we use zinc in various activities. Galvanizing is
one of the best of them. To give a layer of zinc in an ironic stuff is called
galvanizing. The layer of zinc protects iron from oxygen and water of the aur.
Thus rust cannot be seen. Iron does not decay as well. The metals can be protect-
ed by giving layer on tin instead of zinc.

Painting: The erosion of metals can be controlled through painting. To avoid
such erosions refrigerators, selves, cars, stuffs made of steel can be painted with
colour. These paintings can be damaged with the passage of time. In that case il
is better to paint that as soon as possible.

Electroplating: Electroplating is a process of making layer of metal in the
surface of other metal through electrolysis. In this process nickel, chromium, tin,
silver and gold is generally used to make the layer. It not only prevents the
erosion of metal but also increases the attraction and shine. Electroplating of tins
carries out in case of iron made food pots, cycle etc.

Lesson 4: Combustion

Work: Light a candle with a match-stick. Observe

carefully, what is happening? Some portion of candle is |
burning and some portion is going downward by
melting and coagulating. What type of change is
occurring when a portion is being burnt? And what type :

of change is occurring when another portion is being

coagulated at downward?
e Fig-11.4: Combustion of candle

One portion of the candle is burning through the wick. Candle turns to carbon
dioxide and water by reacting with oxygen and producing light and heat energy.
Since the produced carbon dioxide is colourless and the water becomes
126 Science

vaporized, we cannot see that. Thus such transform in candle is chemical change
because in this situation the wax of candle turns completely to different
substance named carbon dioxide and water. The chemical change of wax that
creates heat energy by reacting with oxygen in the air is called Combustion. On
the other hand the portion that is melting and kept at downward is not chemical
change, which is physical change, because here the wax returns to its previous
state just after melting and that does not make any change in its property.

The cooking process in house by burning natural gas or straw is a sort of
combustion. Here the gas or straw produces a huge amount of heat energy by
conducting reaction with oxygen in air that helps us in cooking. Similarly,
burning coal and wood is also combustion.

Do you know from where and how we get the energy to do different works?

The various foods we eat become stored in stomach. After bemg digested
nutrients are absorbed is the body. A huge amount of heat is produced by
breaking these foods in the bodycell. We do various works by using that heat
energy. If the heat energy was not produced, we won't get energy to do any work.
Thus it has become clear that the process which helps to give us energy from
food is a land of combustion.

What happens if we do noi eat for a long time? We don't get energy. We cannot
work as well because the combustion stops if we do not eat. That leads to stop
the production of heat energy and thus we do not get any energy too.

Every combustion is chemical change.

Lesson 5 — 6: Photosynthesis, Water Cycle, Carbon Cycle and
Oxygen Cycle.

Photosynthesis: You know that with the help of sunlight the plants prepare their
own food through photosynthesis. Do you know how this happens? Is it physical
or chemical change? In photosynthesis the plants produce glucose and oxygen
by the reaction of carbon dioxide and water with the help of light. The produced
glucose woks in the growth of plants and oxygen helps us in breathing.

light
Carbon dioxide 4. Water * Glucose + Oxygen

Chlorophyll

2025
a)
S
oq

Changing in surrounding and various incidents 127

Thus it has been observed that the produced substance in photosynthesis, glucose
and oxygen, are completely different than reactant carbon dioxide and water.
That is why it is chemical change rather than physical change. What would
happen of photosynthesis did not occur? We did not get enough oxygen for our
inhalation. So, we can say that photosynthesis is such a chemical change that is
essential for our survival,

Water Cycle: You know that we get water from various sources. Such as, we get
water from rain in our country. In the rainy season different areas of the country
are inundated with flood water. Ok, tell me from where these flood water come?
After the rainy season where do they go back? Again in the next rainy season
from where do they come back?

Water moves [rom one source to another in a cyclic way on the earth. You know
how it rains. Heat from the sun converts water into water vapors from the earth's
surface; that is, pond, canal, river and sea water is converted into water Vapour.
Water vapour goes up and forms water drops. These water drops are combined
together to form clouds that float around. Water drops of the clouds combine with
each other to form large drops that come down to the earth's surface as rain drops.
Water drops of the cloud when become too cold, it forms ice that corme down to
the soil as hail. Rain water flows to the river .From the river it flows to the sea. In
this way water moves from the surface of the earth to the cloud as water vapours
and from the cloud to the earth's surface as rain drop. This rain water flows to the
river from where they ultimately reach the sea. This cyclic movement of water is
called the water cycle. It is to be remembered that a portion of rain water goes
down under the soil and makes a reservoir. It is called underground water, We lift
this underground water and use it for drinking, washing and irrigation purposes,

Fig- 11.5: Water cycle

The wind carries some water vapors as clouds and reach the peak of mountains.
Clouds cool down there and form snow. In summer season the snow melts due
to heat of the sun and come down the mountain. In this way small rivers are
formed on the slopes of mountains. These small hilly rivers with rain water make
128 Science

big rivers when come down to plain land. This water ultimately falls into the sea.
From water to cloud and from cloud to snow on the mountain peaks- thus water
cycles. Again when this snow melts, water moves to the river and ultimately to
the sea. Thus water moves in cyclic order. You can understand water cycle clear-
ly from the above diagram.

Some important changes related to water cycle is vaporization, condensation,
solidification, Let us see which of them occurs what type of change.

Vaporization: In this process water from pond, river and ocean enter into
atmosphere through transforming into vapour with the heat of sun. Now tell, is
vaporization a physical or chemical change? It is definitely a physical change
because here the water only turns into vapour from liquid state; any different
substance has not been produced.

Condensation: The vapour created after vaporization gradually goes up where
the temperature is comparatively low. For that the vapour turns into little drops
of water or cloud after condensation. The process where vapour turns into cloud
is called condensation. This is a physical change as well and mainly opposite to
vaporization. In this process water turns from vapour to liquid, the property
remains unchanged.

Solidification: In the water cycle, water drops of clouds get freezed and turns
into ice. Then this ice is stored on the peak of the mountains and comes down on
earth as hailstone. What types of change does it occur when water turns into ice?
Do the properties of water change because of it? If he properties of water do not
change, it is a physical change.

Carbon Cycle: In carbon cycle, we mainly see how carbon dioxide moves from
one state or medium to another in a cyclic process. The diagram of Carbon cycle
is given below:

Do you understand what type of process or =
change is related to it? One of the related 1

changes is photosynthesis. We have already
come to know that in this process plants prepare Ao Photo
their food (glucose) by reaction of carbon |
dioxide and water with the help of sunlight and ’ fice
produce oxygen for us. Do you remember what \ee
type of change it is? Carbon dioxide enters into i

plants body from atmosphere through this
process, An important step of carbon cycle

2 yeineke trom
industries

mation
=
ae

Fig- 11.6: Carbon Cycle

2025
Changing in surrounding and various incidents 129

is to transfer into fossil fuel from plants. The body parts of dead plants break
down through bacteria and is stored as fossil fuel in the bowels of earth at a
certain stage. Natural gas, coal, kerosene or patrol are prepared through this
process. But when dead plants break down through bacteria, a part of it enters
into atmosphere by converting directly into carbon dioxide. We use fossil fuels
in various works such as in cooking, cars, industries and so on. Fossil fuel enters
into atmosphere by transforming into carbon dioxide and water through this type
of change. Plants then absorb carbon dioxide through photosynthesis from
atmosphere.

Is there any other process where carbon dioxide enters into atmosphere except
combustion?

Yes, other faunas like human being also leave carbon dioxide gas during
breathing and that enters into atmosphere. Is there any other process where
carbon dioxides are being absorbed from atmosphere except plants?

Well, do plants only prepare their foods by absorbing carbon dioxide? Don't they
release carbon dioxide? Yes, plants release carbon dioxide through breathing
like human and other faunas.

Now tell, what type of change it is where fossil
fuels are produced from the bodies of plants and
animals?

This is definitely a chemical change because the
produced fossil fuel is completely different from
starch, protein etc.

Oxygen Cycle: The diagram of oxygen cycle is
given here. What type of process is related to this —-Fig- 11.7: Oxygen Cycle

process? Observe carefully. Plants release oxygen through photosynthesis and
preserve foods (glucose or starch) for themselves. On the other side, other faunas
tncluding human beings receive oxygen that plant already released and produce
energy by the combustion of foods with oxygen and release carbon dioxide
which plants use to prepare their foods.

Thus it has been observed that photosynthesis, carbon cycle, water cycle and
oxygen cycles are closely related to our lives directly or indirectly.

Forma-17, Science, Class-7
130

Lesson 7, 8:

Science

Work: Observation of the combustion of magnesium and air.
Necessary equipments; magnesium ribbon, forceps, ring,
(lighter) Spirit lamp/ Bunsen burner.

Method: Hold a side of a small piece of magnesium ribbon

withforceps. Wear safety glass. Hold the other side of ribbon
over the flame of Bunsen burner. It can be done with lighter

as well. Observe carefully what is happening? While holding Fig-11.@ Cambustion of
the magnesium ribbon over the flame of fire what has been ™*@™St7 and @ir
seen? The ribbon is burning with blazing flame as

magnesium burns in the oxygen of air and we can see the blazing flame.

In this way while all the magnesium get burnt, the flame extinguished itself.
Can you see something like ash? Actually this is the magnesium oxide that has
been produced by burning magnesium and oxygen.

Work: Observation of the reaction of carbonate
compound and acid,

Necessary equipments: chalk, a spoon, light
hydrochloric acid, glass dropper.

Method: Smash the chalk. Take the powder of the
chalk in a spoon. Now add some light hydrochloric
acid in the spoon with the help of glass dropper.

Can you see any change? Are the bubbles coming Fig-11.4: Reaction of carbonate
out? Yes, the bubbles are coming out from the gas compaued!and.actd
and are looking like foam.

What is the reason? The reason behind this is chalk, which is maimly Calcium
carbonate (CaCQs). A reaction between calcium carbonate and hydrochloric acid
occurs after adding light hydrochloric acid and calcium chloride and carbon
dioxide are produced. We see the bubbles and foams because of the carbon

dioxide. When carbon dioxide vanishes, we can see the clear solution of calcium
chloride and water.

What type of change ts it? Physical or chemical change? This is chemical change
because the produced substance ( calctum chloride, carbon dioxide and water) is
completely different from calcium carbonate and hydrochloric acid and their

2025
2025

Changing in surrounding and various incidents 131

properties are different as well. You can use the egg-shell instead of chalk as it is
full of calcium carbonate.

Lesson 9, 10:

Work: Observation of the reaction of metals and acid.

Necessary equipments: Magnesium ribbon, light hydrochloric acid, spirit lamp,
test tube.

Method: Take light hydrochloric acid half of the test tube. Take some small pieces
of magnesium ribbon into the acid. Is there any bubble of gas? If no, heat the surface
of the test tube with the help of spirit lamp. Is there any bubble of gas now? These
are the bubbles of hydrogen gas produced from the reaction between magnesium
and hydrochloric acid. You can test whether it is hydrogen gas or not, Observe what
is happening by holding a blazing match stick at the top of the test tube. Is it blazing
with pop pop sound? Yes, exactly. If it was another gas except hydrogen, it would
not make such sound. The reaction of light hydrochloric acid with metal, what type
of change is it? Definitely chemical change because completely different substance
has been produced here.

You can also do this experiment with zinc, aluminum, copper or other metals like
magnesium ribbon,

The Process of Formation of Rocks

Previously, you have learnt that rocks are of three types, ie. igneous rock,
alluvial rock and metamorphic rocks. The process of structuring rocks depends
on its types. First; come to igneous rock. Do you know how igneous rock
originated? Thousands of years ago the temperature of the earth was very high
and today's habitable earth has been created by decreasing the temperature
gradually. The hot and melting rocks (known as magma) trapped inside the
bowels of the earth while the earth was getting cold. This magma was
transformed into cool hard rock and it is called igneous rock. That means
igneous rock is made of cooling hot mixture mainly rather creating a new
substance. Thus, the process of formation of igneous rock is definitely a physical
change; it is exactly the same process of producing water or cloud from vapour
through condensation.

Now let's see how alluvial rock originated. The igneous rock decays by the influence of
air, water, snow and glacier, ocean-current, storm, cyclone etc. which is the
consequence of climate change. The rocks tum imto small pieces. Water or air takes
these pieces to the ocean through rivers and is stored at the 8 lower level of
the ocean as alluvium. Dead remains of plants and animals trapped inside the
132 Science

layers of alluvium mud at that time. The stored alluvium gradually transforms
into hard rock through various chemical reactions with the pressure and
temperature of water; which is alluvial rock. As various chemical reactions are
related to the origin of alluvial rocks, chemical change occurs in the process of
formation of the rocks,

Now, let's see the developing process of metamorphic rocks. It occurs from
igneous or alluvial rocks. The new rocks produced from igneous or alluvial
rocks through temperature, pressure and chemical change is called metamorphic
rocks. For example, sandstone is a alluvial rock and as it transforms into quartz,
itis called metamorphic rocks. Similarly, as marble comes from lime stone and
graphite from coal, marble and graphite are metamorphic rocks. As the property
of metamorphic rock is completely different from the main rock and chemical
reactions are related to it, the structure of metamorphic rocks is considered as
chemical change.

What we learned from this chapter

The physical change leads to the change of state
or shape of the matter without creating new
substance or changing the properties of the matter.

> In chemical change one or more
substances change completely into new

substance which has different properties "
of its own. Fig- 11.10: Rocks

> To give a layer of zinc in an ironic stuff is called galvanizing.

® Electroplating is a process of making layer of metal in the surface
of other metal through electrolysis.

> A substance reacting with oxygen of the air produces heat
energy in combustion.

® Some important change related to water cycle is vaporization,
condensation, rain, transpiration, infiltration.

>» Rocks are of three types, ie. igneous rock, alluvial rock and
metamorphic rocks.

> Physical change is related to igneous rock and chemical change is
related to alluvial and metamorphic rocks.

2025
2025

Changing in surrounding and various incidents 133

EXERCISE

Fill in the blanks

Lh ee le bo

Boiling is a change.

Mixing sugar in tea is a change.
Burning paper is a change.
Infiltration is related to cycle,
Lime stone is a stone.

Short answered question

_

Lad

What is physical and chemical change? Give examples.

What is combustion? Explain with examples.

What type of change occurs while straw or gas is burnt in furnace,
physical or chemical change? Give reasons for your answer,

Discuss the importance of water cycle.

What are the characteristics of igneous rock, alluvial rock and
metamorphic rocks?

Multiple choice questions

l.

Z.

1.

ii.
lil.
Which one is correct of the following?
a.

C.

Which one of the following is the chemical change?

a. Melting b. Vaporization

c. Photosynthesis d. Filtration

P’ and *Q’ is appropriate for-

Animals release P during respiration

The major respiratory element of animals and plants is 'Q’

The major element of photosynthesis is *P’

i b. i
r

ii and ii d. i, and ii Q

Give the answer to the question no. 3 and 4 according to the following stem: Mr.
Anis is a building contractor. Generally he uses the metamorphic rocks of
limestone to increase the beauty of the building. But sometimes he uses granite
which is originated from magma.
134 Science

3. Which of the following gas will be produced if acid is applied to the
metamorphic rock mentioned in the stem? ast) euening

wath blue flame

a. Oy b. CO; c. Nz A. HD2 grang mcr

slick stopped “
4, What type of granite has been mentioned in the stem?

a. Igneous b. Alluvial c. Metamorphic d.
Fossil

Creative question

«ut
3
fe

7 *

1. Carbon-di-oxide+water Chlorophyll [A] +

a) What is rust?

b) What do you understand by " Electroplating"?

c) Explain what type of change occurs in the reaction as mentioned in the above
stem.

d) Between A and B of the stem which one appears in cyclic order in the
environment - analyze.

a) What is the above picture about?

b) How is alluvial rock created?

c) Explain the process ‘B’ mentioned in the above picture.

d) Analyze the role of ‘C’ in the process ‘A’ shown in the picture.

2025
