2025

Chapter Ten

Phenomena of Electricity and Magnet

We know that electrons have charge. We call the flop electrons electricity.
Electricity is lightening our home, school or office. It helps to run fan, radio,
television, iron, heater, motor, computer and many other things. The use of
magnet has also flourished our daily life like electricity. In this chapter, we will
discuss different phenomena related to electricity and magnet.

After studying this chapter, we will be able —
> to explain the property of charge.
to explain conductor, non-conductor and semi-conductor.
to demonstrate the properties of charge through creating static electricity
to explain how current electricity is produced form static electricity.
to prepare a simple circuit.

to explain the use of electricity in daily used machine.

YW WWv¥oW iW

to differentiate between magnetic and non magnetic substance through.

demonstrating the property of magnets.

v

to demonstrate the process of preparing magnets from magnetic substance.

y

to explain electric magnets.

> to explain earth's magnetic field.
112 Science

Lesson 1-2

Origination of Charge

We know that elements are composed of many small
particles. It is called atom. Atoms are composed of
electron, proton and neutron. It has nucleus at the centre
which is composed of proton and neutron. Electrons
move round the nucleus. Proton is positively (+) charged,
electron is negatively (-) charged and neutron is neutral

particle. The positive charge on the proton is equal and Fig-10.1
opposite to the negative charge on the electron.

But it is interesting that the atom itself behaves neutral. Atom is neither positive
nor negative. There is no charge in atom. What is the reason? The reason is that
an atom contains similar number of proton and electron. That is why atom is
charge neutral. When two matters are rubbed, electrons from one substance can
move into the other. Thus the number of electrons can be raised in a substance.
Now let's give an example. A glass bottle has been rubbed with a piece of silk
cloth. It will be seen that silk cloth will attract electron towards it. For that the
bottle will be positively charged and the silk cloth will be negatively charged. So
it is clear that no charge is created because of rubbing rather the existing change
of the matter moves from one to another,

Property of Charge

Now we can definitely understand that how charge is produced. Now we will sce
what types of properties are shown by the charge (positive and negative). For
that we will do the following works.

Work: Knowing the properties of charge.

Necessary equipments: two combs, woolen cloth.
Method: Hang a small comb by tying it with a ribbon
on a dry stick. It should be hung in such a way that it
cannot touch any other things. Now hang one more
plastic comb on another dry stick so that it can move
freely. Now rub both of the combs with wooden cloth
for some time. Now bring the combs close to each
other. What do you observe? The combs are repulsing
each other. Now bring the woolen cloth close to the

Fig- 10.2; Knowing the
properties of charge

comb, it will attract the woolen cloth.

2025
Phenomena of electricity and magnet 113

Work: Demonstrating properties of charge.
Necessary equipment: two balloons, ribbon, woolen cloth or sweater, piece
of paper.

Fig- 10,3: Demonsirating Properties of charge

Method: Tie the two balloons with ribbon by blowing them up. Now rub the
balloon with woolen cloth or sweater and bring it to the pieces of paper. It
will be seen that the balloon will attract the pieces of paper. What is the
reason? The reason is that rubbing creates charge in woolen cloth and
balloon, What will happen when first balloon will bring to the second one?
You will see that two balloons are going far from one another because the
rubbing has created similar charge to both of the balloons.

Could you take any decision from the above work? Yes, two decisions can be made

from this:

a. Charges of same nature repel each other (in terms of two balloons and two
combs).

b. Charges of opposite nature attract each other (Woolen cloth and balloon).

Lesson-3 : Existence of Charge
Now, we will prove the existence of charge through an easy experiment.

Work : Proving the existence of charge.

Necessary equipments: A plastic comb, a piece of news
paper. sf

Method: Take a portion of newspaper and cut It into _
pieces. Now spread the pieces over a table. Now could Te
you tell what will happen if a plastic comb ts brought to

those pieces of paper? Now bring the comb to those pieces of paper by
rubbing it through woolen cloth (you can also rub the comb with your dry
hair). Could you tell what will happen and why? You will see that the pieces
of papers will jump to the comb.

Here the plastic comb has become negatively charged by receiving electron
from woolen cloth during rubbing which leads to the attraction towards the
pieces of paper.

Forma-15, Science, Class-7
114 Selence

Lesson 4: Conductor, Non-conductor and Semi-conductor

We are familiar with the words conductor and non-conductor. The electrons of
conductors can move from one atom to another easily. For example, metals,
especially, silver, copper, aluminum. A new form of carbon, graphite is
conductor though carbon is a non metal.

Electrons cannot move freely in atoms of non-conductor. But it can be charged
by rubbing. Besides if electron is received or left, it can be charged. For exam-
ple: plastic, glass and rubber.

At low temperature the semi-conductor behaves like non-conductor. It behaves
like conductors when the temperature increases. Germanium, Gallium ete are
the examples of semi-conductors.

Lesson 5: Producing Current Electricity from Static
Electricity

From the previous experiments, we have seen that plastic combs attract small
pieces of paper after being rubbed through woolen cloth. It will not attract the
small pieces of paper if it is touched by hand. What can be understood from this?
It has been understood that there is no static electricity in the comb. Where has
that static electricity gone? This electricity has gone to the ground through hand
from the comb. The electricity, which flows through a body from one place to
another or one matter to another, is called current electricity.

Here it is important to remember that a specific and little amount of charge is
produced because of rubbing. This charge moves to the ground just after being
touched with hand or metals. The flow of electricity stops when the charge is
finished. Thus the flow of electricity is created [or a while. To continue this flow
the continuous supply of electricity from any source should be ensured. We will
have more idea of it later on.

Lesson - 6: Simple Circuit and Its Use

The flow of electricity needs a path like man needs a path to move on. This path
of the flow of electricity is known as an electric circuit. Generally the complete
path of flowing electricity from the positively charged end of the source from
negative is called electric circuit. Generally bulb and battery are connected with
wire in this circuit. When they are connected, the circuit completes. The simple
circuit is shown in the following figure.

2025
2025

Phenomena of electricity and magnet 115

Fae

Bd,

——{J 6

Fig-10,5; Simple circuit

Lesson —7 and 8

Use of Current Flows

Light and heat can be produced from the flow of electricity. Even various works
can be completed through using its mechanism. Now, we will introduce you to
the uses of electric bulb, torch light, iron, heater, electric fan and photocopy
machine as examples.

Electric Bulb

We all are familiar with to this bulb. Two thick wires are
placed inside the air free or neutral gas filled air tight bulb,
There is a coil of a very thin tungsten wire inside an electric
bulb, The coil is called filament. This bulb produces a lot of
heat when it is connected with the electric source and this Fig-10.6 : Electric Binb
filament of bulb emits a huge amount of light.

Torch Light
We all are familiar with to torch light, There is a small
bulb with the battery in torch light. The light turns on

when the switch is on. To spread the light a glass is used
in front of it. Fig-10.7: Torch Light

Electric Fan

Tn electric fan the flow of current is used to do the mechanic -————
activities. Here the electrical energy transform into -——
mechanical energy to rotate the fan. A regulator is used to
control the motion of fan.

Fig- 10.8: Electric Fan
116 Science

Electric Heater

Many of us are familiar with to electric heater. There is a round disk made of
non-conductor in the heater. A coil of Nichrome wire is arranged in the coil. The
wire becomes hot if electricity flows and radiates much heat. In our house this
electric heater is used to cook food.

Electrical Iron

The structure of electric iron is like electric heater, Here the IN
Nichrome wire heats the smooth lower iron made surface. The Le =
production of heat depends on the flow of electricity. If flow —

increases the heat of iron will increase. ;
Fig-10.9: Blectric Iron

Lesson — 9 and 10: What is Magnet?

There is a story in ancient Greece that there was a shepherd named Magnes who
used to live at a place named Magnesia in Asia Minor. He used to praze sheep in
the fields by day and back them home in the evening. One day while returning
home, he noticed that he could not lift up his stick from the ground. The head of
it was stuck to a stone. He noticed that the stone hold the iron made top of the
stick. That means, Magnes observed that iron attracted that unknown stone. This
stone was named after the name of Magnes. Bengali word of magnet is
chumbok. We have also observed that magnet has power to attract iron.
Attraction is a kind of force. Work can be done by force. Therefore, a magnet has
capacity of domg work. So. magnet is a kind of energy.

Properties of Magnet

Work: Property of magnet.

Necessary equipments: white paper, iron
fillings, pin, a bar magnet.

Method: Sprinkle some iron fillings over a
white paper. Keep a bar magnet over the

sprinkled iron fillings or the pins, and lift it “sai. =
up afier moving it a few times. What — me,"
been observed? You will observe that iron Fig-10.10

fillings or pins remain stuck to the body of
the magnet. It will be seen by careful observation that most of the iron fillings

or pins remain stuck to the two ends of the magnet. Amount of iron fillings

2025
2025

Phenomena of electricity and magnet 117

stuck to the magnet gradually decreases from the end to its middle. You may
not observe any iron fillings or pins in its middle. It is understood from this,
that the power of attraction of the magnet is maximum at two points near the
two ends of the magnet.

Now take two similar bar magnets close
to each other, You don’t know about the
poles here. Suspend the bar magnets by
tying it with a thread at the middle.
What has been seen? The magnet is

practically lain pointing north and south. qo eo
Do the same thing with the other magnet.

It will be seen that the magnet will also

; ois oe Fig-10.11: Properties of Magnet
practically be positioned pointing north

and south, It is understood from this that hanging magnets, without obstruction,
always lie pointing towards north and south.

Now let us mention north and south poles of magnets respectively by N and S.
Now bring the north Pole of the first magnet near the north pole of the second
magnet. What are you seeing? Repulsion occurs. From this it is understood that,
like poles of magnets repel each other.

Now bring the north pole of the first magnet near the south pole of the second
magnet. What has been observed? Similarly bring the north pole of the second
magnet near the south pole of the first magnet. They have come close to each
other very easily. From this we can take decision that, unlike poles of magnets
attract each other. Therefore, like poles of magnets repel cach other and unlike
poles of magnets attract each other.

Lesson — 11: Magnetic and Non- magnetic Substance

Will magnet attract all substances? No, magnet does not attract all the
substances. Magnet mainly attracts iron, nickel, cobalt and maximum steels.
These substances are called magnetic substance. Again, magnet does not attract
many substances. For example: copper. aluminum, brass, wood, silver, plastic
etc. These are non magnetic substances.
118 Science

Work: Identification of magnetic and non-magnetic substance.
Necessary equipment : a magnet and different things of own house.
Method: Take the magnet in front of each thing separately, See which one
attracts magnets and which one not. Now fill the table below,
Name of various things of | Magnet attracts or What type of
house not substance?

Lesson — 12 and 13
Transforming Magnetic Substance into Magnets

Magnets can be prepared in many artificial ways. Rubbing and electrical method
have been discussed below.

Method of Rubbing

A bar magnet and a steel bar are needed for this
experiment. Rub the steel bar from one to
another end with a pole of bar magnet. Do this
for several times. Does the steel bar attract a
pin? Thus, a steel bar converted into a magnet
through rubbing. If it has been rubbed through LN} 1s)
north pole of the magnet, it will be seen that

north pole will be created at the first portion of Fig 10-12: Method of Rubbing
rubbed steel bar and south pole at the end.

Electrical Method

Take a long iron nail. Coil it with ordinary
electrical wire available in the market. Connect its
two ends with a battery's two ends. Now it is seen
that any part of the nail can attract a pin. The nail
does not attract a pin if the electric current flow is
stopped. So it is understood that the nail has been
converted into a temporary magnet. Strength of
electro magnet depends on the flow of electric
current through it.

Fig-10,13 : Electrical Mathod

2025
2025

Phenomena of electricity and magnet 119

Terrestrial Magnetic Field

If a bar magnet in hung by tying it with a thread at the middle, the magnet
practically lies pointing north and south. [t occurs because of terrestrial magnets.
The behaviour of a bar magnet in a globe is similar to the behaviour of terrestrial
magnets. The effect of terrestrial magnet exists everywhere. Two poles of
hanging bar magnet indicates two poles of Earth's magnet. Here the north pole
of bar magnet indicates the north side. But a north pole always attracts a south
pole. ‘Therefore the south pole of Earth's magnet works as north pole.

New words learned from this chapter

Charge, static electricity and current electricity, conductor, non-conductor and
semi-conductor, simple circuil, magnetic substance, non-magnetic substance
and Earth's magnet

What we learned from this chapter

> No charge is created because of rubbing rather charge in matter transforms
from one substance to another.

> Charges of same nature repel each other and charges of opposite nature
attract each other.

Vv

In order to maintain supply of electricity, there should be a source, which
can supply electricity continuously.

Electricity flows in every part of simple circuit continuously.

The attraction of magnet is highest near two poles.

¥ WW

Like poles of magnets repel each other and unlike poles of magnets attract
each other,

Vv

Hanging magnets, without obstruction, always lie poimting towards north
and south. It occurs because of Earth's magnet.

EXERCISE

Fill in the blanks
l. moves round the nucleus.
2. Semi- conductors generally behave like in low temperature.
3. The behaviour of a in a globe is similar to the behaviour
of magnets.
120 Science

Short answered questions

1. How is charge produced?
2. How does electric bulb spread light?
3. How can magnetic substance be transformed into magnet?
Multiple choice questions
1. The aim of using regulator in clectric fan is to —
a, increase the longevity of fan b. decrease sound

c. control motion d, decrease cost

2. Based on the properties of magnets which of the following substances
belong to same group?

a. nickel, silver, copper b, gold, cobalt, silver
b, cobalt, iron, nickel d. iron, mercury, aluminum

Observe the following figures carefully and answer the question no, 3 and 4.

NW — neutron
P — > proton
« —- electron

Fig: A Fig: B
3, The characteristics of figure A is: it is
i. Charge neutral ii. Positively charged iii. Negetively charged
Which one of the following is correct?
a. oi. b. ii c. ili d. ii and iti
4. In case of figure A and B-
a. Ais negatively charged b. B is positively charged

b. A and B have attraction d. A and B have repulsion

2025
Phenomena of electricity and magnet 121

Creative question

1. Samiha has a bar magnet. She prepared a magnet by rubbing method and
another by electrical method.

a. What is called magnetic substance?
b. Explain that the earth is a huge magnet.
c. Describe the first method of preparing magnet.

d. “The second type of magnet is strong though temporary”- analyze the

quotation,
2. As
el
fH
+
Metal sphere
Fig.1 Fig. 2

a. What is called static electricity?
b. Why metals are conductor of electricity? Explain.
c. Explain the function of the figure | ?

d. There are two types of electricity in the second figure. Analyze it by
mentioning the areas.

Forma-16, Science, Class-7
