a
=
om

Chapter Four
Respiration

Every plant and animal has life. For every physiological function in the body
energy is required. In the cytoplasm energy is stored in starch, carbohydrate,
protein and fat molecules. In every organic cell, for all organic reactions, oxygen
isessential. Actually, the potential energy trapped in food from solar energy is
converted to kinetic energy and heat energy by oxygen which is the primary aim
of respiration. With this energy organisms take food, move, excrete, grow,
reproduce and perform all other physiological activities. Respiration is a
kind of burning process where foods are oxidized to release energy.
After Studying this chapter, we will be able —

® to explain the energy producing process;

>» to describe functions of main parts of respiratory system of animal;

® to describe causes and symptoms of diseases of respiratory system;

> to explain the preventive measures and remedy of diseases of respiratory

system,
} to compare the processes of photosynthesis and respiration; and

> to draw the diagrams of main parts of respiratory system.

Lesson 1: What is Respiration?

Energy is necessary for performing different physiological activities of
living organism. This energy is produced by the process of respiration.
Oxygen is used to burn the cellular food in the body of the organism.
As a result, energy and carbon-di-oxide is produced. So, respiration is a
physiochemical process where food is oxidized (in presence or absence of
oxygen) and potential energy stored in cellular food is converted and
released as kinetic energy and potential energy stored in cellular food is
converted and released as kinetic energy and heat energy and consequently,
carbon-di-oxide is produced.

Respiration is a metabolic process. In this process, every organism takes
oxygen from atmosphere and releases carbon dioxide. Few lower plants
and animals complete respiratory process without oxygen. In every case,
carbon dioxide is released. Respiration is a continuous process that occurs
day and night in every living cell of plants and animals.
36 Science

Lesson 2: Respiration in Living World

Respiration is an intra-cellular metabolic process. This process in living cells of
plants and animals is alike. But the process of taking oxygen and releasing
carbon dioxide vary in different organisms. In plant body, this exchange of
oxygen and carbon dioxide during respiration is comparatively simple. Plants do
not have any definite respiratory organ. Oxygen enters inside plant body through
stomata, lenticels and inter cellular spaces. Submerged plants take oxygen
through entire body surface. Animals respire through different organs in various
ways. In lower animals respiration occurs mainly through skin and trachea.
Higher animals have special respiratory organs for gascous exchange. Such as
fish and tadpoles perform these activities with the help of gills and higher
vertebrates with lungs.

Respiration in plant

In plants carbohydrate produced through photosynthesis is oxidized to produce
energy in the process of respiration. This energy is used in metabolic functions
of plants. There are mainly two types of respiration in plants.

a) Aerobic Respiration: Respiration that takes place in the presence of oxygen
is called aerobic respiration. Aerobic respiration occurs in all advanced plants.
b) Anaerobic Respiration: Respiration that takes place in the absence of
oxygen is called anaerobic respiration. This respiration takes place in primitive
organisms like bacteria.

Evidence of Energy Production During Respiration:
Production of energy (heat) can be proved by the following experiment.

Materials Required: Two thermo flasks, two thermometers, some
germinating gram seeds, water boiled gram seeds and one rubber cork with a hole.

Experiment: Put germinating gram seeds in one flask and close it with rubber
cork, Push one thermometer through the hole of the rubber cork in such a
way that the mercury portion remains within the germinating seeds. Similarly

fill up the other flask with water boiled gram seeds. Then place the other

thermometer in the flask in similar process. Mercury panaaeee

level in every thermometer is marked and noted.
Observation: After few hours the mercury level is

{hearraflask.

changed in the thermometer placed in germinating

gram seeds due to release of heat. But in other

pertinated gram aged

flask mercury level in thermometer remains :
Fig 1. Experiment of respiration wits gram teed

unchanged because no heat was released .

2025
2025

Respiration 37

* Why does the mercury level in thermometer placed in thermo flask with
germinating gram seeds change?

* What is proved by this?

Lesson 3 : Respiration in Animals

We breathe with the help of nose. What are the gases we get in and release

outside during breathing? Plants and animals take oxygen from the atmosphere

and release carbon dioxide. This process continues throughout their life, But the

process of taking oxygen and releasing carbon dioxide is different in plants

and animals. Plants take oxygen through one type of pores in leaves called

stomata, Gaseous exchange occurs through various different organs in lower and

higher animals, such as gills, lungs ete. Organs that take part in respiratory

process; arecollectively called respiratory system. Human respiratory system is

composed of the following organs:

1. Nostril and Nasal Cavity 2. Nasopharynx 3. Larynx 4. Trachea 5. Bronchus

6. Lungs 7. Diaphragm

1, Nostril and Nasal Cavity: Nasal cavity is a triangular shaped cavity placed

above the buccal cavity. It runs from nostril to pharynx. A\ thin membrane

separates the two from one another. Its interior part is covered with hairs and

the posterior part by a membrane. The process of taking air through nostril is

called inhalation and when air contains dusts and germs, the hair and the

membrane obstruct them.

2.Nasopharynx: Nasopharynx is the last portion of nasal

cavily. The air enters the trachea through Nasopharynx,

a

i

.

=r i 5 Fig- 4.2: Nostril and nasal
§, Bronchus: The trachea divides into two bronchus from |” cavity

near the lungs and enter into the left and right lungs. They are called right
and left bronchus (plu. bronchi). After entering into the lungs these branches
again divide into innumerable branches. They are termed as bronchioles. The

3. Larynx: It is situated at the junction of pharynx and
trachea. Larynx has sound producing cords called vocal
cord, On the larynx hole there is a lid. It covers the larynx
during the intake of food so that food cannot enter the

larynx. It opens again during inhalation.
4. Trachea: Starting from larynx upto bronchus is trachea.
Through this trachea air enters into lings.

structure of a bronchus is like trachea.
38 Science

6. Lungs: There are two lungs on two sides of the
heart inside the chest cavity. It is soft like sponge. The
right lung is a bit larger than the left one, Lungs are
covered with two fold membranes, called pleura. In “ a bremchicks
between pleural folds, some slimy substances are
present. So, it prevents friction with chest wall.
Bronchus branches profusely on enter the lungs. These

Fig- 4.3 ; Human respiratory system
sack is made of epithelial cells. These cells are surrounded by capillary vessels.
When air enters into these cells, they swell up like balloon and then
automatically shrinks. Walls of air sacks and capillary vessels are so thin that air
can pass through them easily.

small bronchioles enter into air cells or sacks. Each air

7. Diaphragm: The muscular layer that separates abdominal cavity and chest
cavity is diaphragm. It looks like an open umbrella. When diaphragm shrinks,
it goes down and the area of chest cavity increases. When it expands, it goes up

and the chest cavity shrinks. Breathing function is done due to expansion and
contraction of the diaphragm.

Do yourself: Draw a labeled diagram from the chart and describe the functions
of lungs.

New words: Trachea, Air sack, Larynx, Bronchioles, Bronchus.

Lesson 4-6: Respiratory Process

We inhale air through nostrils. We term this as respiration. This is a wrong
concept. Our chest continuously expands and shrinks and takes oxygen and drives
out carbon dioxide like balloons. As a result, the area of the lungs increases and
decreases in volume, Lungs continuously expand and shrink to inhale oxygen
and exhale carbon dioxide, This is called breathing. This is one step of respiration,

Respiration is divided into two types, such as 1. External respiration and
2. Internal respiration.

1. External Respiration: The process where gaseous exchange occurs through
lungs is external respiration, In this process, exchange of oxygen and
carbon dioxide occurs between lung and capillary vessels. External
respiration is completed in two steps such as:

2025
2025

Respiration 39

i) Inhalation: We take in oxygenated air from the atmosphere. It is
called inhalation. During this process muscles in between diaphragm and chest
cavity shrink.

ii) Exhalation: After inhalation, exhalation phase starts. In this stage.
muscles of diaphragm and chest cavity relax and squeeze. As a result, area
of lungs becomes small. The air and carbon dioxide from the alveoli
transported though bronchus and trachea, are expelled outside through nostril.

Do yourself; Observe the breathing of your classmates. Try to do this
pressing hard the diaphragm. What happens? Why? Explain.

2. Internal Respiration: During internal respiration, the cellular food is oxidized
in presence of oxygen and converted into kinetic energy and heat energy.
Oxygen that enters into the blood of the lung moves with blood to distant capillary
vessels. Oxygen then reaches inter cellular juice through the walls of capillary
vessels. Oxygen enters the cells via this oxygen carrying juice. Then, it reacts
chemically with cellular food and produce energy. As a consequence, heat energy
and carbon-di-oxide are produced. This carbon-di-oxide is transported to lung
again through blood,

New Words: External respiration, Internal respiration, Inhale and Exhale.

Flowchart of Respiratory system is given below:

Nostril 4, Nasal passage “ » Nasopharynx “—> Trachea

G3
Bronchus “=> Branchiole “= Alveoli or Air Sac

O03

Do yourself:

Stand up and sit down or run for some time. Count your breathing. You'll find
that the breathing rate will be higher than in resting state. Count breathing per
minute of your younger sister and brother.

40 Science

Lesson 7 :Common Disease of Respiratory Tract

Mr. Hakim is suffering from Tuberculosis. Profullo Babu is suffering from
Asthma. Small baby Bikash is attacked with pneumonia. What are the causes of
these diseases? What precautions should they take to avoid these diseases?
What are the remedies of these diseases? Certain portion of these diseases
could be prevented if cause, symptoms, remedy and preventive measures of

these diseases are known,
Tuberculosis

Tuberculosis is a well known infectious disease. This disease is easily
transmitted. Persons who are weak, do hard physical labour and live in unhygienic
environment and suffer from malnutrition or live with tuberculosis patients, are
liable to suffer from this disease.

Cause: One type of bactena is responsible for this disease,
Symptoms:

o Body weight is gradually lost and the patient becomes weak.

o@ Occasional cough with bleeding.

q Fever in the evening and sweat at night.

o Pain in the chest and back, occasional stomach disorder.
Remedy:

o The patient should be given nutritious food.

o According to the advice of a physician treatment should be started
quickly. Long treatment is needed and should be continued till complete cure.

Treatment must not be discontinued without the advice of a physician.
Prevention:

o Preventive measure for Tuberculosis is BCG Vaccine. New born baby
should be vaccinated within one year. The new born baby should be
vaccinated as soon as possible.

o Tuberculosis patient should be kept separately. Best suggestion is to
send the patient to the hospital. It ensures proper treatment.

2025
Respiration 4l

o Cough and spit of the patient should be buried under the soil because
they contain large number of germs.

o Mouth should be covered with handkerchief when coughing and sneezing.
o Children should not be allowed to go to tuberculosis patient.

Pneumonia

Tt is a disease of the lung. Severe cold attack is responsible for this disease.
After measles and bronchitis a patient may be attacked with pneumonia if the
patient catches cold severely. It is a fatal disease for children.

Cause: The disease mainly caused by infection with one type of bacteria.

Symptoms: Patients suffer from cough and breathing difficulties. The nostril
becomes wider during inhalation. High fever with feelings of constant pain in the
chest,

Remedy: Immediate advice of the physician is to be taken. Food and
medicine, according to the advice of the physician, should be given. More and
more water and liquid food ( Soup, fruit juice) should be given. The patient
should be given nutritious food,

Preventions: When children are attacked with measles or bronchitis, more care
should be taken.
Bronchitis

Tracheal infection is called bronchitis. Unhygienic environment, dusty
weather, catching cold and smoking may cause this disease.

Cause: One type of virus is responsible for this disease.

Symptoms: Cough with respiratory trouble, often cough comes out, The patient
suffers from fever and gradually becomes weak.

Remedy: Stopping smoking. Treatment according to doctor’s advice,
Asthma
Asthma is not an infectious or contagious disease.

Cause: The cause of this disease may be some food, dusts in the air or pollen
grains when inhaled. In children cough and cold is the main cause of this disease.

Exception: In certain seasons or at the time of season change abundance of the
disease is marked.

Forma-6, Science, Class-7
42 Science

Symptoms: Suddenly breathing trouble shoots up. Sometimes breathing is about
to stop. The patient tries to breathe forcibly, The alveoli of the lung do not get
proper supply of oxygen or the supply is blocked. As a result the patient is in
trouble, During inhalation skin in between ribs is pushed in, Sometimes white
colored cough comes out with cough but no fever. The patient cannot take hard
food and sometimes the patient vomits and become weak.

Remedy: The patient should live in a well ventilated and well lighted house.
Avoiding eating foods or coming in contact with things such as woolen clothes
that can intensify the disease. Follow doctor’s advice and avoid dust and smokes,
Give up the habit of smoking.

Taking medicine, relieves respiratory trouble but it is not cured fully, It is

necessary for the patient to carry respiratory trouble relieving medicine with them.

Lesson 8

You have learned about photosynthesis while reading in class six. Complete
the following work:

Work: Write down the point of differences between photosynthesis and
respiration and present on a poster paper.

What we learned from this chapter
Respiration is indispensible for energy.

Stomata and Guard cells: Guard cells help opening and closing of stomata.
Guard cells contain chlorophyll. At day time, photosynthesis occurs in guard
cells and as a result stomata opens. Respiration is essential for organisms.

External Respiration : Oxygen enters into capillary vessels from the alveoli of the
lungs and carbon dioxide comes from blood to alveoli. This gaseous exchange of the
lungs is called external respiration. Inhalation and exhalation is included in external
respiration,

Internal Respiration: Inside mitochondria within cell oxygen acts on food
in some enzyme controlled reactions. Internal respiration goes like this.

Lymph: It is a transparent mild alkali. It is a special modified tissue fluid.

2025
Respiration 43

EXERCISE
Fill in the blanks:
1. In food is produced but in food is oxidized.
2. is called the power house of a cell.
3, Lung ts composed of a large number of
4, is an infectious disease.
5. Respiration is a process.

Short answered questions:

1.
2,

What is internal respiration?

What are the causes and symptoms of pneumonia?
Mention the necessity of respiration.

Mention the function of alveoli.

Explain respiration in plants and animals.

Multiple choice questions:

Le

Which one is not a part of respiratory system?

a. Skin b. Lenticel

c. Guard cell d. Stomata

2, Lower animals respire with the help of —

i. gillsandskin ii. skin and trachea iii. lungs and gills

Which one of the following is correct:

2025

a 1 b. il

c. andi d. i and ii
44 Science

See the stem and answer question no, 3, 4 and 5;
3. What is the name of *W’ labeled part?
a. Alveolus b. Bronchus c. Bronchiole d. Trachea

4. In which part of the stem exchange of O» and CO: occur?
a V b. W c Xx d ¥

5. Name the disease produced by the infection of part “V’

a. Asthma b. Bronchitis c. Pneumonia d. Tuberculosis

Creative questions:

1.
a. What is pleura?
b, Pneumonia is a fatal disease — Explain.

c. Explain the process shown in the diagram.

d. Analyze the remedies of the problem created when

‘F’ substance enters into ‘E’ part.

2
a. What is respiration? Sho €

b. How does stomata help in respiration? Explain.

f
c. Which one of *Y’ and ‘Z’ utilizes product of “X°?

Explain.

d. For gaseous exchange how ‘Y° and *Z’ are inter

dependent oneach other? Write with arguments.

Do yourself:

1. Draw a diagram of respiratory system and label it. Discuss the
importance of lungs in respiration.

2025
