Chapter Two

Cellular Organisation of Plants and Animals

In natural environment, one can observe many similarities and
dissimilarities amongst various plants and animals, irrespective of their
size, structure and activities. The main similarity is that the bodies of the
organisms are composed of cells. For last few centuries scientists made
many research works on structure, shape, nature and other areas of
organization. Structure of all cells of one single organism is not similar,
rather different. We shall discuss cell structure, but all organelles described
in the following pages are not found in a single cell. So, one cell is
reconstructed with all the organelles in it which are found in various cells.
The idea, scientists got about a cell from compound light microscope,
was confirmed and elaborated when electron microscope was invented.
In this context discussion on a typical cell is being initiated,

After studying this chapter, we will be able —

to draw labeled drawings of plant and animal cells.

to compare plant and animal cells.

to explain structure and functions of different organelles.
to explain the function of various types of tissues.

to differentiate plant and animal tissues.

¥WwV¥wWw Ww

2025
2025

Cellular organization of plants and animanls 13

Lesson 1-2: General Structure of Plant and Animal Cell

Body of all organisms is composed of one or more cells. A typical plant cell
comprises of two parts — cell wall and protoplasm.

1. Cell walk: In plant cell there is a hard and thick non-living wall, which is called
cell wall. It is composed of cellulose. Animal cells do not have this wall. It is
covered with a thin membrane, called plasma membrane. The main function of
cell wall is to protect the living parts of the cell and delimiting the boundary of
the cell,

2. Protoplasm: Protoplasm is semisolid, jelly like sticky and granular living substance.
Signs of life are emerged due to various reactions within the protoplasm. It is
composed of various organic and inorganic substances. The water constitutes
the 67-90% of the Protoplasm. Protoplasm contains three main paris : cell
membrane. cytoplasm & nucleus.

A. Cell membrane or Plasma membrane : The soft membrane that surrounds
the entire protoplasm is called cell membrane or plasma membrane. Plasma
membrane is composed of phospholipids belayer. Now a day it is called
bio-membrane. It controls the transport of water, minerals and gases in and out
of the cell.

B. Cytoplasm: Jelly like substances outside the nucleus is named as cytoplasm.
Living structures inside cytoplasm that take part in various physiological activitie,
of the cell are called cytoplasmic organelles. In a typical cell normally th,
following organelles are found —

1. Plastid 2, Mitochondria 3. Golgi body 4. Endoplasmic Reticulum
5.Ribosome 6. Lysosome 7.Centriole and 8. Cell Vacuole

Pig-2.1 : Microscopic structure of a plant cell Fig-2.2 : Microscopic structure of a animal cell

Work: Observing the diagrams, write down the differences between plant and
animal cells and present in a poster paper before the class.

14 Science

Lesson 3 - 5: Cytoplasmic Organelles

1. Plastid: Round or elliptical organelles with or without pigments present in living
cells are the plastid. Normally, animal cells do not have plastids. This organelle
is a unique characteristic of plant cells. The primary functions of plastids are
synthesis of food, pigmentation and storage of food. Depending on the presence
and absence of pigments, plastids are of two types: Chromoplastids or coloured
plastids and Leucoplastids or colourless plastids. Chromoplastids are of two
kinds, choloroplast and chromoplast. It has three rare inembrane
parts such as, covering membrane, grana and stroma.

Inner neembrane:

Chloroplasts are present in green parts and contain Stromalamall
chlorophyll pigments. Its main function is to Pub

help photosynthetic processes. Granum lamatle

Fig-2.5 : Chloroplast
Chromoplast produces various colours in flower petals and fruits. During

ripening of green fruits, chloroplasts are converted to chromoplast and produce
variations of colour in the fruits. The brilliant red colour of tomatoes you see is
due to lycopene pigment found in chromoplasts. In chromoplast, yellow, orange
and red colour pigments are present.

Leucoplasts are present in plant parts where light cannot reach, such as plastids
of root cells. Leucoplasts when exposed to sunlight converts to chloroplast. You
might have seen that when green grass is covered with brick, grass becomes
white; the chloroplasts of those grasses become white.When the brick is taken
away, the white grass gradually becomes green due to sun ray. It is proved that
one type of chloroplast may be changed to another type.

2. Mitochondria: Small rod like organelles dispersed in cytoplasm of plant and
animal cells are the mitochondria (sing: Mitochondrion). Every mitochondrion
is surrounded by two layers of membranes. .;
Outer layer is smooth but the inner one is

folded inward like fingers. These are called

cristae.

Membrane

Cristy

Onisome

Mitochondrion is the source of all energy
used in metabolic activities in an organism, Fig- 2.4: Mitochondrion

So it is called “power house” of the cell. Number of mitochondrion is large
in green plant cells but the number is more than one thousand in liver cells,

Pa
=
Lie
2025

Cellular organization of plants and amimantls 15

3. Golgi body: These are round or thread like organelles covered by membranes
and lie near the nucleus. Its function is to secrete enzymes, hormones etc.
4. Endoplasmic Reticulum : The cytoplasm contains a single-membrane

reticulum-like organelle called the endoplasmic reticulum. Smooth and rough
endoplasmic reticulums are found in cells.

5. Ribosom : Ribosomes are found free in the cytoplasm or as granules on the
endoplasmic reticulum. Proteins are synthesized in ribosomes.

6. Lysosome : The cytoplasm of animal cells contains lysosomes enclosed in a
bilayered lipoprotein membrane. It contains hydrolytic enzymes.

7. Centriole: Near the nucleus of an animal cell, there are two tube like
organelles called centriole.Centriole is usually covered by non granular
transparent cytoplasm. This part is called centrosome. Normally, centriole
is absent in plant cells but lower plants like fungi have centrioles.
The main function of centriole is to form aster during cell division in
animal cells.

8. Cell Vacuole: Cellular living organelles and non-living substances are present
in the cytoplasm. In plant cells non-living substances include various reserve
foods, excreted and secreted substances. In cytoplasm,there are large and small
vacuoles full of liquid substances (cell sap). These are called cell vacuoles.
Usually, animal cells do not have cell vacuoles but in certain cells when vacuoles
are present, they are very small in size. In plant cells, large numbers of vacuoles
are present and their sizes are comparatively large. Different organic acids,
salts, carbohydrates, proteins etc. are present in soluble form in the vacuoles and

make up cell sap. nuclear membrane

C. Nucleus: Densest part of protoplasm covered
by membrane is nucleus. Every nucleus jf nucleolus

consists of four parts, namely- i) nuclear ‘yy sis nucleoplasm
nuclear pore

membrane ii) nucleolus ili) nuclear chromatin fibre

reticulum and iv) nucleoplasm.

Best time for examining nuclear parts is in Ne 5s ESN Raa SE Ca

inter-phase stage just before the cell division, Four parts of nucleus are discussed below:

i) Nuclear Membrane: The double layered membrane which surrounds
the nucleus, is nuclear membrane. This membrane is extensively

porous, These pores are called nuclear pores,
16 Science

Functions of nuclear membrane are to establish linkage between cytoplasm
and nuclear materials and to protect the nucleus.

i) Nucleoplasm: Jelly like granular and transparent semi solid matter
covered by the membrane is the nucleoplasm or karyolymph. It
functions as matrix for chromosomes, nucleolus and controls physiologic
activities of the nucleus.

iil) Nucleolus: Inside the nucleus, there is a small, round, bright and
comparatively dense structure, known as the nucleolus. Normally one
nucleolus is present in a nucleus.

iv) Nuclear Reticulum or Chromatin Fibres: Inter twined thread like
structure floating in nucleoplasm, is called nuclear reticulum or chromatin

fibers. At the time of cell division nuclear reticulum breaks into pieces.
Each piece is called chromosomes.

Work: Cut a potato into pieces and rub it in water. Now take a drop of
water and examine under a microscope and compare with the figures. Are
these structures cell organelles or other structure? Which parts of the cells are

they?

New words: Cell membrane, Protoplasm, Cytoplasm, Plastid, Mitochondria,
Nucleic Acid and Chromosome.

Lesson 6-7: Charactaristics and Functions of Plant Tissues

Body of an organism may be unicellular or multi-cellular. Organisms,which are
made of only one cell is called unicellular. All physiologic activities, like nutrition,
excretion, respiration and reproduction,are performed in one cell only. Organisms
with a number of cells are called multi-cellular organisms. Tissues which make
the body structure are classified and on the other hand, show division of labour.
If all cells would perform the same physiologic functions at a time, irregularities
and anarchy would prevail in structural variations and physiologic activities of
the organisms. So, to ensure smooth life activities of organisms, different type
of cells form groups to act unitedly Tissue refers to a group of similar cells that
work together to perform a specific function.

2025
Cellular organization of plants and animanls 17

Plant Tissues:

Plant and animal body are composed of different types of tissues. Different
types of tissues perform different specific functions.

Depending on the capacity of cell division, tissues are classified into two types,
such as. a) meristematic tissue and b) permanent tissue,

Meristematic Tissues:

Tissues whose cells have the ability to divide, are called meristematic tissues.
They are found in developing regions of the plant, specially at the apical

regions of stem and root.
MY + & vere. nucleus

ee >
! fr ro] [elen

Or E- cytoplasm
1/9 | 6] @;@ ae

Fig- 2.6: Meristematic tissue

Functions:

e Meristematic tissue gives rise to new cells and tissues due to continuous
division.

* Jt increases the height and girth of plants.
Meristematic tissue form new tissues.

Permanent tissues: Matured tissues originating from thick walled ce!
meristematic tissues, having definite shape and incapable
of dividing, are called permanent tissues. Permanent
tissues are found in almost every part of plants. There are
three types of permanent tissues : simple tissues (eg.
parenchyma, collenchyma, sclarenchyma), fibrous
tissues (xylera and phloem) and secretory tissues.

Functions:

Fig- 2.7: Permanent tissue
« Production and transport of food

« Construct the body and strengthen the plant.

Forma-~3, Science, Class-7
18 Science

Work: Separate the identifying characteristics of meristematic and permanent
tissues. Write it down in poster paper and present in a group.

Lesson 8-11: Charactaristics and Functions of Animal Tissue

How do we walk and move? Mark how we eat and how we breath. These
activities are separate and of different nature. We walk with foot, write with
hand, eat with mouth and chew with the help of teeth. These activities are
done by different organs. Structure and functions of cell and tissues are
different in these organs. Bones, muscles and brains etc, are constituted
with many cells, whose structures and functions are different in nature.

In multi-cellular animals, when a number of cells unite to form a group and
perform a certain work, are called tissues. Aims of these cells may be the
same but their shape, size and structures may vary. It depends on nature of
work of the cell and tissue. Animal bodies are made of different types of
tissues, such as —

a) Epithelial tissues;
b) Muscular tissues;
c) Connective tissues;
d) Nervous tissues.

A) Epithelial Tissues: Tissue that makes the open areas of the body-cover
and makes up the internal covering is called epithelial tissue. External layer
of our skin and internal layer of our chick are made of epithelial tissue.
Different glands of the body are also made of epithelial tissues.

Characteristics of Epithelial Tissue:

. Epithelial tissues are arranged in one or more strata,
* Cells are arranged on a thin foundation membrane.
. This type of tissues do not have any inter cellular matrix.

Functions: These tissues protect the internal and external organs from injury.
Stomach and intestinal epithelial tissues secrete gastric juice.

2025
2025

Cellular organization of plants and animanls 19

Work: Observe which tissue makes internal lining of your buccal cavity, body
covering, inside of nose and ear. Write down the functions of these tissues.

B. Muscular Tissue: We can move few muscles on our will, such as— muscles
of hands and legs. But there are muscles which we cannot move at our will. These
types of muscles move voluntarily at their will, such as muscles of stomach. From
the discussion we learned that muscles are of three types, such as:

1. Voluntary Muscles 2. Involuntary Muscles 3. Cardic Muscles

Work: First bend and then straighten your elbow. What sort of change you have
observed in your muscle? Tow has this change happened? Observe, and
wmite down and present before the class.

1.Voluntary Muscles: When we bend our elbow, muscles of the upper arm

contract and draw lower arm and make it bend. Muscles that we can contract and

expand at our will and make our organs move, are called voluntary muscles.

Number of voluntary muscles in human body is more. These muscles stick to

the bone and help to move the organ.

2. Involuntary Muscles: The responsibilities of the intestinal muscles is to
transport of food stuff in digestive tract. We do not have any control
on these types of muscles. It means the muscles that do not contract at
our will are called involuntary muscles.

3. Cardiac muscles : Cardiac muscles are another category of specialized
involuntary muscles. These muscles supply blood to the whole body by
alternate contraction and relaxation in a self controlled rhythm. Only heart is
constituted with this type of muscle. This rouscles looks like a voluntary
muscle but involuntary in function.

Functions of Muscles:
* Muscles give shape of the body and help in bone movement.

® Help in movement and locomotion,
e It protects internal organs.
« Heart muscles help in blood circulation in the body.

Work: Sit down on a table in such a way that the legs remain in
hanging position. Straighten one leg and then bend. Which muscles
take part in this movement? Try to feel by touching with your hand
and present before the class what you have understood.

20 Science

C. Connective Tissues : The connective tissue establishes connection among
different tissues and organs. These tissues are mainly solid. liquid or fatty.
Blood, bone, cartilages and fatty tissues are the examples of connective tissues.

Functions of Connective Tissues:

Main constituent of bone is calcium. Bones give structure, bear the weight and
give mechanical support to the body. Tendons attach muscles with the bones.
Fatty tissues store oils and fats. Fibrous connective tissues help contraction and
expansion of walls of ling and blood vessels. Cartilages are softer than bones and
can bear more pressure and stretch, such as cartilages of nose and ear. Blood
carries various substances (oxygen, food, excretory substances) from one part

to another in the body. Besides, blood gives resistance against germs. Blood is a
liquid connective tissue.

D. Nerve Tissues:

Tissues of an organism that on responding to stimuli can create
appropriate sensation, are called nerve tissues. Neuron is the unit
of nerve tissue. Brain is constituted with numerous neurons.
Every neuron is composed of three parts, such as- a) Cell body
b) Dendron and c) Axon.

Functions of Nerve Tissues:

e Recieve impulses from different sense organs of the body
and send impulse to the brain,

* Active parts of the body respond to stimuli, such as
when a mosquito bites, this stimulus is sent to the brain. Fig 24: A single newine
The brain informs the hand and the hand tries to kill the
mosquito.

* Storage of the stimuli or incidents in the memory.

* Co-ordinate among different physiological activities of the body.

2025
2025

Cellular organization of plants and animanis 21

Work: Close your eyes. Can you see anything? Close your ears with your palms.
Can you hear anything? How can you remember as you read? Which tissues help
to perform all these activities? Draw one cell of this tissue and label its different

parts.

What we learned from this chapter-

>

¥
¥
$

Ll

Structural and functional unit of the body is cell.

Scientist Robert Hook is the first person who discovered cell.

Total living content ofa cell is protoplasm,

Living organelles within cytoplasm are Nucleus, Plastids,
Mitochondria, Golgi body, Centriole ete.

Plastids are of three kinds, such as chloroplasts, chromoplasts and
leucoplasts.

Mitochondria are called the power house because energy produced
in respiration is stored in mitochondria.

Having same origin when cells of same or different sizes perform
the same function in a group is called a tissue.

Tissues are mainly of two kinds, meristematic tissue and permanent
tissue. Permanent tissues originate from meristemetic tissues.

Tissues that continuously divide and produce new tissues are
called meristematic tissue.

The tissues whose cells have definite shape, lost dividing power
and originated from meristemetic tissues are called permanent tissues,
Cardiac muscle is a special kind of involuntary muscle.

Blood is a kind of connective tissue.

EXERCISE

Fill in the gaps:

l,

Bw be

tissues are unable to divide.
Plant tissues are of two types: tissue and tissue.

Cardiac muscle is a type of

Brain is composed of innumerable

is the power house of cell.

22 Science
Short answered questions:

1, Describe the functions of muscles,

2 Write down the characteristics of epithelial tissues.

2 Describe the structure of nucleus.

4 Mention the functions of plastids.

5. Describe the structure of a mitochondrion.

Multiple choice questions:

|. Which of the following structure is absent in meristematic cell’?

2

a, Cell Wall b. Nucleus

c. Cell Vacuole d. Cellulose

. The cell vacuole contains-
i. Organic Acid and Salt
li. = Protein and carbohydrate

iii, = Organic Acid and inorganic acid

Which of the following answers is correct?

F

mi

a. iandii b. i and tii

c. land iil d. i, ii and iil

rom the following Stems A and B answer the question number 3 and 4:

A
The function of figure A is —

i. To give mechanical support 1. To store fats iil. To produce red blood cells.

2025
2025

Cellular organization of plants and animantls 23

Which of the following is correct?
a. iand i b. i and ii

c. land ill d. i, ti and ii

4. Characteristics of A and B are —
i. They are connective tissue
i. They transport oxygen
il, Their main constituent is calcium.

Which of the following is correct?
a} i b) iil
ce) iand il d)i, and iti

Creative Question:

a. What is blood?

b. What is meant by epithelial tissue?

n

. Explain the importance of bones in figure P.

d. Compare the tissue of the figure P and Q.
24 Science

Lined

a, What is a cell wall?

b. Why is the mitochondria called power house?

c. Why is figure N coloured though it is a root?

d. Explain the changes of the plant in figure M that would occur after

8-10 days.

Do yourself:

1. Which organs of your body are of voluntary muscles? Make a list of them
and present before the class.

2025
