2025

Chapter Twelve
The Solar System and Our Earth

The sun is the centre around which our habitat, the earth, another seven planets
and some more luminaries revolve. All the moving luminaries and the huge
space, centring the sun, are called the solar system. The huge universe beyond our
vision is called the space. The motion of the earth is of two types. The earth
rotates on its own axis and revolves around the sun in its own orbit once in a
year. One of the effects of the earth's rotation is the occurrence of day and night,
the change of seasons.

After studying this chapter we will be able—
® to explain the formation of the solar system.
® to compare the physical characteristics of the members of the solar system.
>» to draw the structural formation of the solar system.
> to explain the effect of the earth's rotation and its consequences.

® to realise the effect of the earth's rotation on the living world.
136 Science

Lesson 1: The Earth Moves Round the Sun

In class six, you have got the idea on the earth, the sun and the moon. Early in
the morning, the sun is found to be risen in the East. Gradually it comes over our
head. In the evening, the sun sets in the West. At the end of the night the next day
early in the morning the sun again rises in the east. It seems from the earth that
the sun moves round the earth from the east to the west. Man used to think so in
ancient time but the scientists have been able to prove that in fact the sun does
not move round the earth. Rather the earth moves round the sun.

Why do we think that only the sun moves round the earth? You have certainly
gone out for a walk by bus, launch or train. Have you marked one thing? When
these run fast, the trees seem to be moving so fast backward. Actually the train,
the launch or the bus is running forward but they seem to be standing still. On
the other hand the trees by the side are at rest but they seem to be moving so fast
backward. The earth and the sun are in the same condition. The earth is moving

round the sun from the earth but it seems that the sun is moving round the earth.

In ancient time, man was interested into the sun, the moon and the stars. At that
time there was no instrument to observe these luminaries. They would believe as
they observed with their bare eyes. You know that Aristotle was a great
philosopher and scientist two thousand years ago. He used to think that the sun
moves round the earth, From now to two thousand years ago famous
mathematician and astrologer Ptolemy told strongly that all things move rounds
the earth. This motto was believed by man for a long. Some did not believe the
motto of Ptolenry. But none was able to prove it wrong.

Copernicus, (1473-1543) an astrologer gave a new theory through observation.
He proposed the model of sun centric instead of earth-centric. The main theme
of his model is that the earth moves round the sun. He also told a new thing. That
is, the earth rotates with its own axis. Later scientist Galileo and Kepler present-
ed the proof of this model in favour of Copernicus. At present this model is
proved and scientist and common people have accepted it.

Lesson 2-4: The Formation of Solar System and Its Introduction

You have come to know that the sun is a star. The sun is the centre around which
the earth, another seven planets and some more luminaries revolve. All the
revolved luminaries and the huge space around the sun is called the solar

system.Most of the place of the universe beyond our vision is the huge space.

2025
The solar system and our earth 137

The eight planets are rotating according to their distance centring the sun. The
description of these rotated planets as arranged are shown and the members of
the solar system are introduced.

Sun: The sun is the centre of solar system.The sun is one of the burning gaseous
bodies like other stars. This burning gaseous body contains mainly hydrogen
and helium gas. The atoms of hydrogen gas mixing with one another, turn into
the atoms of helium. A lot of energy is produced in this process. This energy
spreads in the solar system as heat and light.

Fig- 12.1: The solar system
Thus we get heat and light from the sun. The sun is a medium star in size. It is
bigger than the earth about 12 lac times more. It is situated approx. 15 crores
kilometres away from the earth. So, we see the sun so small.

Introduction of the Planets: The eight planets are moving round the sun. The
earth is such a planet. The planets are generally round. There are different
gaseous bodies in the planets. But the planets do not produce any energy. So no
planet gives either light or heat. They have no light of their own. All of them
rotate round the sun and get light and heat although they look brighter than the
earth, Introduction of the planets in brief is:

Mercury: Mercury is the nearest to the sun. There is no atmosphere in mercury.

Forma-18, Scoence, Class-7
138 Science

Venus: From the earth we find a star in the western sky as the morning star and
the evening star which is in fact not a star. It is the planet of the sun which is
called Venus. The sun light falls on it so it looks lighted.

Earth: Perhaps you know that the earth is the only planet in which there is
atmosphere and temperature necessary elements for the survival of plants and
animals in the world. It is the third closest planet to the sun.

Mars: Mars looks reddish because its surface is red in colour. The surface of it
is dusty and there are very light atmosphere there and water may be present as
the available report show.

Jupiter: Jupiter is the largest planet of the sun. It is gaseous only. It has no solid
surface.

Saturn: The planet Saturn is made of gas only. There is a ring all around it.
Uranus: Uranus is made of gas and ice.

Neptune: Neptune is almost a planet like Uranus.

A luminary named Pluto was called planet before but in 2006 the scientists
decided that it is a small incomplete planet.

Satellite: You have known that the planets of the solar system revolve round the
sun. Similarly the small satellite revolves round the planets. The moon is the
only natural satellite of the earth. It moves round the earth. The satellites are
smaller than the planets. It cannot produce heat and light. They get light from the
sun, The light of the sun reflects on the surface of the moon; so we see the moon
lighted.

The moon takes 27 days 8 hours to round the earth. The moon is the attractive
object from ancient time. You sce that the moon is not seen in one night which
is called the day of the new moon, The next night a small piece of moon is seen
for a while in western sky. The small piece of moon gets bigger every night.
After two weeks, the moon looks like a plate, which is called full moon. The
moon begins to get smaller from the next night of the full moon. Thus after two
weeks in any night the moon is not seen at all. We can see the new moon and the
full moon after every 29 days 12 hours. Why does it happen? You will know this
answer in the next class.

2025
2025

The solar system and our earth 139

Fig- 12.2: New moon and full moon

Although the moon is the only natural satellite of the earth, more than 6700
satellites sent by men are moving around the earth. These are called artificial
satellites. The artificial satellites are sent in order to collect the information of
wireless, telecommunication, weather and others. Other planets have natural
satellites like earth.

Other Luminaries of Solar System:

There are other luminaries in the solar system without the sun, the planets and
satellites. They are comets, meteors and asteroids. They revolve around the sun.
They are small in size than planets, rocky or metallic objects and they are called
asteroids. They are like small planets. The comets are also a part of our solar
system. They are made of solid (gas, ice, dust). But it turns into gas easily when
it gets heat. When the comets go near the sun, it is scattered in the sky turning
into gas or solid due to the heat of the sun. Then it turns into a watchable tail like
broom. Sometimes it is found from the earth. Some comets are found after many
years in the sky of the earth such as: Halley's Comet, which appears every 76
years in the sky. [t appeared in 1910 and 1986. It will be appeared again in 2061.
140 Science

Have you seen a fireball flying all on a sudden at night? These are called
meteors. Meteors are the smallest luminaries which revolve round the sun. This
solid small piece when comes in contact of atmosphere bums out.

Fig- 12.3 : Comet

This is why it is found running away or falling down like a fire sphere.
Sometimes big put out meteors create big holes while they fall down.

Lesson 5: Our Habitat the Earth

We live in the earth. How is the shape of the earth? Can we understand its shape
looking around it? Does it seem like a dice or plate? Apparently the earth seems
to be like a plate. It is thought that, we and our house are on the dice or plate. On
the other hand, the plate is covered with the sky. But earth 1s not like a dice or
plate. It is round but not totally . The earth is like an orange which is flat at
North-South pole. The earth is inflated in the middle and is compressed towards
the poles.

The three fourth of the earth's surface contain water and only one part is covered
with soil. There is gaseous atmosphere surrounding the earth. Have you seen the
globe? When we see it, we understand that the earth is like the globe. We are
staying over a sphere like a globe. The question is, why not we fall down from
the earth. Its cause is gravitation. The earth attracts everything to its centre with
this force. As a result, nothing living on the earth's surface falls down.

a

Le |
2025

The solar system and our earth 141

Fig+ 12.4: Men on the earth's surface

Lesson 6, 7: The earth rotates on its own axis and revolves
around the sun in its own orbit.

You see the sun rises in the east. It sets in the west in
the evening. Next morning, you see that the sun again
rising in the east. It seems to be for this that the sun is
rotating from the east to the west centring the earth. In
ancient time man used to think that the earth is static
and the sun moves round the earth and the earth rotates
on its own axis. You have certainly played with a top.
How does the top rotate? The top rotates, standing on
the pointed head. At the same time it travels circular or
elliptical way from onc place to another on the soil.

Fig-12.5: Top’s two kinds of
motion

Thus the top has two way motions. One is to rotate on its own axis and another
is to travel a way on the soil. The earth has two way rotations like top. The earth
takes 24 hours to rotate once on its axis from the west to the east. This is called
the earth's diurnal motion. The second thing is that the earth takes 365 days 6
hours to revolve around the sun in tts orbit. This is called annual motion. Days
and might occur because of the diurnal rotation of the earth. The experiment
below shows how day and night occur.
142 Science

Experiment: The experiment of the earth's diurnal motion. How do days and
nights occur? 1g BSA?
Equipment: A globe, a candle or lamp or
charge light

Procedure: At first observe the globe
carefully, Notice that there is a stick
passing through the middle of the globe.
This is the imaginary axis of the earth.
The earth rotates from the west to the east _
on its axis.

Fig- 12.6: Experiment of the carth’s diumal

Light the lamp, and place it on a table ora motion

flat floor. Next, place the lamp in front of

the globe. It will be better if the room is dark. Consider the source of light as
the sun and the globe as the earth. Now look at the globe. Are all the
directions of the globe illuminated equally? No, one side is illuminated and
the other side is dark. You can certainly see that the half of the globe is
illuminated and the other halfis dark. Which halfis illuminated? The half that
is in front of the light. The illuminated side can be considered as day and the
dark side can be considered as night. Now, rotate the globe slowly. and what
can you observe? It is found that the dark side is becoming illuminated and
the illuminated side becoming dark gradually, But all the time, half of the
globe is getting light and the rest half is not getting. Thus, half of the earth
experiences day while the other half experiences night. If we keep a
particular place of the globe in front of the light and if we rotate slowly, then
the illuminated part (day) moves towards darkness, at one time it becomes
full dark (night). If we rotate more in the same direction that particular place
becomes illuminated and at one time it becomes fully illuminated i.e. at that
place day returns again.

Like this experiment the earth rotates on its own axis. As a result, day comes
after night, night comes after day. Again day comes, again night comes, again
day. Thus the change takes place. In other word, day -night-day-night-day we
see this change because the earth rotates on its own axis.

2025
2025

The solar system and our earth 143

Lesson 8, 9: The Earth Moves Round the Sun: The Earth's
Annual Motion

Already you have known about the earth's diurnal motion or the rotation on its
own axis. Another motion of the earth is annual motion. The earth takes 365
days 6 hours to move around the sun in its orbit. The period the earth takes to
complete the revolve is known as the solar year or simply year. Fluctuation of
day or might length and the change of seasons occur as a result of annual motion.

Do you see the same weather throughout the whole year? In the month of
January or Poush- Magh is it hot or cold? Is the weather of Ashar or Bhadra
same like Powsh or is it different? In Bangladesh we see different weather in
different time. We feel cold in the month of Poush and Magh and hotter in
Baishakh and Jaistha. Can you say, why? You will be able to answer when you
would know about how the earth moves around the sun.

The earth rotates around the sun being little bit inclined towards the sun. But the
eatth changes its inclined position at different time of the year. So, a particular
part of the earth faces the sun at a particular time. A definite part of the earth
facing the sun, gets sun heat vertically for a long line. In that part of the earth the
summer prevails. You have already known that the equator of the earth is divided
into two. The north part is called northern hemisphere and the south part is called
southern hemisphere. We live in the Northern Hemisphere. Bangladesh comes
closer to the sun on the 21st June. So at this time we find the sun above our head.
So 21st June is the longest day and shortest night in the northern hemisphere.
The sun reaches its northern most limits on 21st June and the date is known as
Summer Solstice. But during this time, there has been down pouring due to
monsoon wind in Ashar and Srabon. We call this time rainy season. On 21st June
the southern hemisphere remains at the furthest distance from the sun.

21st June is the longest night and shortest day in the southern hemisphere. Then
the heat of the sun becomes inclined and the heat of the sun is inclined at an
angle. As a result the southern hemisphere at this time gets less heat of the sun.
Then there winter comes. Such as: In Australia, June, July, August are the winter
seasons.

The earth changes its inclined position after 21st June. The northern hemisphere
including Bangladesh moves a bit distance. At the same time the southern
hemisphere advances a bit towards the sun. In this way on 23rd September the
equator of the earth faces the sun and at that time the sunremains in equal
144 Science

distance from the north and the south pole. So, on the 23rd September, the
duration of the day and night is equal in both hemispheres of the earth. Then
over the equator, the sun shines vertically and it is hot in the equator As the
duration of the day and night is equal in Bangladesh, it is neither hot nor cold
in here. Then in the southern hemisphere the winter departs and the summer is
coming, i.e. it is spring there.

On the 22nd December, a part of southern hemisphere remains facing the sun.
Then Bangladesh ts far away from the sun. So, in Bangladesh, the day is short
and the night is long. The sun shines inclined at the south. The heat of the sun is
less and due to inclination Bangladesh then it is winter. On the other hand, in
Australia of southern hemisphere, the day is long and the night is short. The
sun shines vertically. Then, it is summer in the southern hemisphere.

Again on 21st March, the earth inclines

facing the sun. Then the night and the day

become equal over the globe. This is

why in our country the day and the night

are equal. At this time, the weather is v«mpoe
neither hot nor cold. Then it is spring in Ds,
our country. After 21st March the earth =~)
rotates to its previous position on 21st "ne"
June. Thus, the fluctuation of day and

nighi occurs due to the effect of the

earth's rotation around the sun. The season

south pale sping

also changes because of this rotation Fig-12.7; Rotation of the earth round the sun

Can you imagine what would happen if the earth does not move round the sun?
No change of season would take place if the earth does not move round the sun.
In this case perhaps our country would enjoy dry season all the year. No winter
season would come or vice-versa, 1.¢. all the time it would be cold in the earth.
Due to the change of seasons, different crops grow in Bangladesh. Otherwise
only one croup would grow and it would become difficult to live.

In Russia and other cold countries, man would not be able to survive if the
season does not change. Most of the parts of these countries remain covered with
ice almost all the year round. At that time no crops grows. When summer comes,
the ice melts. Then man grows crops, i.c. if the sammer does not come, they
would not be able to grow crops.

2025
The solar system and our earth 145

What we learned from this chapter-

>
»

The earth moves round the sun.

The solar system is composed of the sun and the luminaries revolving
round it and the huge space. The huge universe beyond our vision is

called the spece.

The sun is one of the burning gaseous bodies like other stars. This
burning gaseous body contains mainly hydrogen and helium gas. The
atoms of hydrogen gas get mixed with one another and turned into
atoms of helium. A lot of energy is produced in this process. Thus, we get
heat and light from the sun.

The small satellites move round the planets. The only natural satellite of
the earth is the moon. The satellites are smaller than the planets, They
cannot produce heat and light of their own. They get light from the sun.

There are other luminaries in the solar system except the sun, the planets
and satellites. They are comets, meteors and asteroids, They are moving

around the sun.

The earth does not look like a dise or plate. It is round but not
completely round. The earth is like an orange which is slightly flat to the
north and south, We are staying on the surface of the earth,

The earth has two way rotations. The earth is rotating on its axis from
the west towards the east and it takes 24 hours. This is called the earth's
diurnal motion. Secondly the earth takes 365 days 6 hours to rotate

around the sun. This is called the earth's annual motion.

Day and night occur as a result of the earth's diurnal motion. The
fluctuation of day and night takes place as a result of annual motion and

the season changes.

Forma-19, Science, Class-7
146 Science
EXERCISE

Fill in the blanks

1. The sun is a medium sized

2. planet is moving around the sun.

3. The moon is the only satellite.
4, We stay on the of the earth,

5. We do not fly off from the earth due to

Answer the following questions in brief

1. Why did men think before that the sun moves round the earth?

2. Who told about the earth centred model?

3, Explain how the sun and the other stars produce heat and light,

4. What is comet? How is its tail created? Set an example of your
acquainted comet,

5. Explain the earth's two way motion citing an example.

6. Show that through experiment how the days and night occur.

7. Discuss the effect of change of seasons over human being.

Multiple choice questions
1. Which planet consists of ice and gas?
a. Jupiter b. Saturn c. Mars d. Uranus
2. The word which is applicable to the sun ts -
i. Astar

ii. A burning gaseous body
iii, Gives lights to all planets and stars

Which one of the following is correct?
a. i b. ii c. iand ii d. i, ii and iii

2025
2025

The solar system and our earth 147

Answer the question no. 3 and 4 from the table below:

Planet Distance from the sun | Time of one rotation
(Crore km) around the sun
Venus 10,80 225 days
Earth 14.96 365 days
Jupiter TTBS Approx. 12 years
Saturn 142.70 29.5 years
Uranus 287.1 -
Neptune 449.8 165 years

3. The planet (that is not mentioned in the table) which has a distance of 22.8
crores km from the sun. Where is it situated’?

a) In between Earth and Venus

b) In between Jupiter and Saturn
c) In between Saturn and Neptune
d) In between Earth and Jupiter

4, How long does the Uranus take to move round the sun?
(a) 10 years (b) 29 years (c) 80 years (d) 170 days

Creative questions

North pale

a) What is diurnal motion?

b) Why does it rain heavily in Bangladesh in between June and July?
148

bh

d)

a)
b)

d)

Science

When do the smallest nights and longest days occur at
southern hemisphere? Explain with the figure.
What will be the length of the day and might on 30 December

at the Northern Hemisphere? Answer the question showing logical
grounds.

How long does it take for the Moon to move round the earth?

Why is Pluto not the member of the solar system?

Which one of the planet between number 3 and 4 remains dark?
Explain.

Why is the planet No.4 not suitable for human habitation in spite of

having much similarities with planet no.3? Explain with arguments.

2025
