2025

Chapter Five
Digestive System and Blood Circulation System

The foods that we take are mostly complex foods. These complex foods
cannot be utilized directly by our body. The process by which complex and
insoluble foods are changed into absorbable, soluble and liquid form of food
with the help of specific enzymes, is called digestion. The system that takes
part in digestion is called digestive system.

Cell is the smallest unit of physiological functions. Every cell needs food and
oxygen to remain alive. Few useless and harmful substances are produced
during metabolic activities. The removal of such substances is very much essential.
So inter-relationship of different systems is necessary. Blood circulation system
performs this function.

After studying this chapter, we will be able —

> to explain the functions of major organs of digestive system with a flow
chart.
to explain the role of enzymes in digestion of food.

to explain the functions of digestive system,

to describe the causes and symptoms of diseases of digestive tract.

to explain remedy and preventive measures of the diseases of digestive system.
to become aware and make other members of the family aware about
these diseases of digestive system.

to draw diagrams of main parts of digestive system.

to explain the functions of blood and blood cells.

to explain the blood circulatory system.

to explain the functions of a heart,

to explain the ways of keeping heart healthy.

¥V¥V Vv

VwWwWwWwv
46 Science

Lesson 1 : Digestion of Food
Food is necessary to remain alive. What are the foods that we take? Why do we

take food? Let us try to understand them through following questions and answers:

a) What are the necessities of food in our body?

b) What are the main three types of foods?

c) How do three types of foods meet our physical demand?

d) What are the necessities of vitamins and mineral salts?

e) Why are indigestible fibrous foods necessary? In what type of foods
are they found?

You have learnt the answers of these questions in class VI, chapter no, 13, We
will know about the changes of food that occur in our body. We take food
through our mouth. After swallowing, we don't see the food, After few hours,
food is digested and converted into simple ingredients that the body can absorb.
Undigested and useless materials are expelled as fecal matter. We do not have
any control on the changes that occur inside the body. In ahealthy body, these
jobs are done in usual course. We can see only taking of food through mouth and
expelling fecal matter through anus. What changes happen to the foods in
between these two activities?

The group of organs that take part in bringing these changes are called digestive
system. The digestion of food that we take starts from the buccal cavity. What
changes happen in the buccal cavity that we can observe by performing the
following experiment.

Work: This experiment needs two students. Put toast biscuits or dry bread
(boiled potatoes or rice) into the mouth of one student and tell him to chew
for some time and to keep it inside the mouth without swallowing. Ask
the other student to observe the activities. Then the second student will
repeat the same activities and the first student will observe the activities
of the first student. Now both of them will jointly answer the following questions.

a) Which parts of buccal cavity moved while chewing foods?

b) Did the biscuits and dry bread show changes while inside the mouth?

c) After chewing did any change occur in taste?

d) What types of food constituents are there in bread and biscuits?

e) Which parts of your body moved during swallowing foods?

f) After swallowing where do the foods go? Observe how it moves.

2025
2025

Digestive system and blood Circulation system 47
New Words: Digestion, food component.

Lesson 2 : Saliva and Enzymes

You like sweets very much and one plate of Rasogolla (sweetmeat) is kept in
front of you. Could you feel any change in your mouth? Could you feel the
presence of some liquid substances like water inside your mouth? Wash your
right hand carefully with soap. Take some fluid from your tongue with your
clean figure. What is its color?

Let us compare the following with what we have learned from the above
experiment. We take food through our mouth. We start chewing with teeth after
taking it inside the mouth. The tongue stir the food so that it is chewed well. The
food mixes up with saliva inside buccal cavity. Saliva is a colorless fluid. Saliva
is secreted from the salivary gland situated at the back side of the tongue. Saliva
has a special role in digestion. It makes food slippery and help to swallow.
Saliva contains one type of enzyme. May be, you are thinking what the enzyme
is? Enzyme is:

- Such a material that mixes with food and helps the reaction but does not
take part in it and remains unchanged,
- The enzymes work well up to a certain temperature,
- Enzymes perform definite and specific functions such as Tripsin acts
only on proteins.
Enzyme present in saliva turns starch into sugar (maltose). For this reason, when
carbohydrates are chewed and kept inside the mouth, it tastes sweet. Tongue
helps us to swallow food materials. From the last portion of the mouth two pipes
grow inside the body. One of this pipe like structure is called oesophagus and the
other is trachea. Behind the trachea food and water reach the stomach through
this pipe line.

How the foods get into the stomach:

Do yourself:

Take one marble and a piece of rubber pipe. Take care that the size of — the
marble is not bigger than the girth of the pipe. Push the marble into the pipe.
Now press at the back side of the marble. It will move forward through the
pipe. Similarly food moves forward through the oesophagus. The oesophagus

AS Science

has ring like muscles, These muscles expand and contract. Muscles posterior
to food material contract and muscle anterior to food expands. This expansion

and contraction is called peristalsis. As a result, food materials gradually reach
to the stomach.

New Words:  Peristalsis, Oesophagus, Enzyme
Lesson : 3-5 : Digestive System

We know food is essential to remain alive. We take

complex foods. We have already known that complex =

foods cannot be accepted by the cells directly. So, ses

complex foods need to be converted to simple foods and 4
‘|

}

; : “fe pesophingus
water through complex chemical processes. It is known as ~
digestion of food. To complete digestive process a \
number of organs form, the digestive system along with A
few glands secreting digestive juice and enzymes. The stv
digestive system is constituted with mouth, buccal cavity, wae
oesophagus, stomach, small intestine and large intestine. — ssodnm-/)
Besides, three glands are there who secrete digestive juice mA
and enzymes, such as stomach glands, pancreas and liver.
Moreover, few small glands in the inner walls of stomach ae
and small intestine secrete digestive juice and enzymes.
Our digestive system extends from buccal cavity to anus.
Following are the descriptions of different organs of

digestive system:

Fig- §,1: Digestive System

1. Mouth: From the mouth the digestive tract begins. On the upper side of the
mouth is upper lip and on the lower side is the lower lip. Through opening
and closing of these lips, we control taking of foods, Foods enter into the
buccal cavity through this opening.

2. Bueeal Cavity: Next to mouth is the buccal cavity. an
The buccal cavity is surrounded by two jaws and com 0 #05
teeth en the frent siae. Above this, there is palate é

and beneath, there is muscular tongue. Moreover, sas

there are three pairs of salivary glands on two ses,

sides. Teeth cut food materials and help grinding

them. At this stage the tongue feels the taste of “"" —

food and repeatedly sends food under tooth for Fig- 5.2: Types of Teeth
chewing. Saliva from salivary glands make foods
slimy and help

2025
Digestive system and blood Circulation system 49

to swallow. Saliva contains one type of enzyme that partially breaks down
starchy food and convert it to sugar. Number of permanent tooth is 32 having 16
in each jaw. Teeth are of four types, such as i) Incisor teeth that cut food particles
into small pieces. 11) Canine teeth cut and tear hard parts like meat. 11) Premolar
teeth chew and grind food materials. iv) Molar teeth help chewimg and grinding
of food substances. Besides, aller growing other teeth, the wisdom teeth grow.

By

4,

Pharynx: Next to buccal cavity is the pharynx through which food materials
move from buccal cavity to oesophagus.
Oesophagus: [ts location is in between pharynx and stomach. Food materials
pass through it from pharynx to stomach.

Stomach: Its location is in between oesophagus and small intestine.
Due to peristaltic movement of pharynx and oesophagus slimy foods are
stored here. Shape of stomach is like a bag. Its wall is thick and muscular.

First and last part of stomach contains muscular rims. On the stomach

wall large number of gastric glands are found. The food temporarily stays

here. Digestive juices from gastric glands help in digestion.
Small Intestine; It is the next part which is the longest part of digestive tract,

Small intestine is divided into three parts, such as —

a) Duodenum: This is the first part of small intestine. Next part of small
intestine looks like ‘U’. Bile from gall bladder and pancreatic juice
from pancreas comes here through ducts and mixes up with food.
These juice also participates in digestion. Here digestion of proteins,
carbohydrates and lipids occur.

b) Jejunum: It is the part in between duodenum and ileum.

¢) Meum: This is the last part of small intestine. In inner walls of ileum
there is a absorption zone. There are finger like projections in the wall
to perform the function of absorption through different processes. They
are called villi. After digestion, the essential parts of food is absorbed by
villi surface.

Large Intestine: Large intestine starts just after the small intestine. It extends

from ileum to anus. At the joining point of small intestine and large intestine,

there is a valve. It is smaller than small intestine in length but its inner
diameter is greater than the inner diameter of small intestine. Large intestine
is divided into three parts, such as — a) Caecum b) Colon & c) Rectum.
Rectum is the last part of large intestine. It looks like a bag, Undigested parts
of foods are deposited here.

Anus: Anus is the last part of digestive system. The digestive canal opens

outside through this part.

Forma-?, Science, Class-7
50 Science

Digestive Glands and Their Functions:

When secretions of any gland outside the digestive canal participate in digestion
the glands are called digestive glands. You have already learned that salivary
gland, liver and pancreas are digestive glands. Salivary glands secrete saliva.
Saliva contains enzyme and water. Water makes food soft. The enzyme in saliva
is ptyalin.

Liver: Largest gland of the body is liver. Bile is produced in liver. Bile ts stored
in gall bladder. During digestion bile through bile ducts comes to help in digestion
of fats and oils.

Pancreas: Some enzymes are produced in pancreas, such as — amylase,
tripsin, chimotripsin and lipase. Tripsin and chimotripsin help in digesting
proteins, lipase helps digesting fats and oils and amylase helps digesting
carbohydrates.

Gastric Glands: Gastric glands are found in interior walls of stomach. Juice
secreted by these glands are called digestive or gastric juice.

Intestinal Glands: Villi of small intestine contain a larger number of glands.
These are called intestinal glands, The juice secreted by these glands is intestinal
juice.

Large Intestine: No digestion happens in large intestine. Here no digestive juice
or enzymes are produced. Large intestine mainly absorbs water from the food.
This function is very essential. It helps expulsion of excess water from the body.
In large intestine a bacterum called E.coli ferments fiber-rich food.

Undigested part of food is stored in rectum and expels outside the body through
the anus when necessary.

New Words: Stomach, Pancreas, Liver, Tripsin, Amylase, Lipase, Ferment.
Lesson 6 : Common Disease and Their Remedy

1. Gastritis: Usually, taking too much spicy and oily foods and taking
meals irregularly result in burning in the chest due to secretion of extra
acids. It causes burning and bad feeling inside the belly or the chest.
Burning sensation is felt in throat and pain in the stomach ineluding other
symptoms also crop up. If timely treatment is not done, ulcer may form
in the stomach and intestine. It is called gastric ulcer. This disease can be
prevented by taking meals timely and avoiding too much spicy foods.

2. Dysentery: Dysentery is a well known disease in our country. It is of two
types, such as —
a) Amoebic Dysentery: When Entamoeba, a unicellular organism entering
into human intestine, creates diseases like this. The symptoms of this
disease are - pain in the abdomen and mucous or bleeding with stool.

2025
2025

Digestive system and blood Circulation system 51

b)

Drinking water from tube well or boiled water, taking care so that water
and vegetables are not contaminated and saving food stuffs from
flies and cockroaches are the measures that can prevent infection of this
disease. But the infected patients should seek doctors’ advice and take
proper medicine as a remedy.

Bacillary Dysentery: When Shigel/a bacteria attacks, intestine causes this
type of dysentery. This germ attacks epithelial layer of large intestine.
As a result repeated defecation with stool mixed with mucous. Occasional
bleeding occurs. So it is called blood dysentery. One should not neglect
this disease. Treatment according to doctor’s advice is essential. This
disease can be prevented when one follows the general health tips.

3. Constipation: Actually, constipation is not a disease. Constipation has
various causes. Such as—slow movement of food through intestine, not taking
green fruits and vegetables, not going for defecation, when feeling for
defecation comes etc. Making habits of clearing bowels regularly, taking
vegetables, fruits and foods containing dietary fibres can remove these
difficulties.

Work: Students will write names of diseases of digestive system. They will
write in groups the causes of these diseases, One from every group will present
their findings and other will compare them.

Care of Digestive System:

1.

ww

Tooth: Tecth should be brushed and cleaned after every meal. Food
particles that stick to the teeth gaps get rotten and spread bad breath.
It causes dental caries. One should not take too much sweets. Sweets are
responsible for dental caries.

Food: Foods should be clean and boiled properly. Stale and rotten
foods should not be taken. One should cut nails regularly. Plates and
other crockery and hands should be cleaned before taking meals.

Taking Food: Meals should be taken in time regularly. Do not eat
much. Always take balanced food. Drink sufficient water after sometime
of taking meals, Always drink boiled water after cooling. Take food
chewing slowly. One should not take much spicy and oily foods,

New Words: Constipation, Bacillary dysentery, Amoebic dysentery.
52 Science

Lesson :7-8: Blood Circulatory System
Transportation of blood is called blood circulatory process. Circulatory
system in human body is constituted with blood, heart, artery, vein, lymph and
lymph ducts. The system through which blood is circulated in the body is the
blood circulatory system. Blood circulatory system includes heart, blood and
blood vessels,

Blood and Its Constituents:

You have seen slaughtering of hen, cow or goat.
During slaughtering blood comes out in a spout.
What is the color of blood? What type of substance
is the blood? Blood is a deep red fluid. It is a liquid
connective tissue. Its taste is alkaline. Blood
contains two constituent materials, such as-

~fed blood
corpuscle

=| plasma
a a= while bl
, eee ?

l. Plasma 2. Blood corpuscles Fig: ean Constituents of Blood

1.Plasma: Plasma is the liquid part of blood.

Normally 55 percent of blood is plasma. It contains

protein, salts and food substances absorbed from

the intestine. Blood cells float in plasma. It contains fibrinogen that helps in
clotting of blood.

Functions of Blood Plasma:
1.Blood plasma carries oxygen, food substances to different parts of the body

2. It carries harmful substances (such as carbon dioxide, urea, uric acid etc.)
from all over the body and expels them through different excretory organs.

2. Blood Corpuscles:In blood there are three types of blood cells, such as-
a. Red blood corpuscles
b. White blood corpuscles
c. Platelets

a. Red Blood Corpuscles: Blood looks red due to red cells. It contains one
pigment called haemoglobin. Oxygen mixed with haemoglobin reaches
every cell of the body, Red blood cell is biconcave (both the surfaces are
curved inward). It is a round disk like cell. There is no nucleus in human
red blood corpuscles. It is produced in bone marrow.

2025
2025

Digestive system and blood Circulation system 53

b. White Blood Corpuscles: White blood corpuscles are a bit larger in size
and irregular in shape. They contain nucleus. They are produced in spleen
and bone marrow. They kill germs that enter into the body. It acts as a
security guard of the body. They can be compared with soldiers,

c. Platelets: It looks like a circular or round structure. They are smaller

than red blood corpuscles. They do not contain any nucleus. They stay in

clusters. They are produced in red bone marrow. In case of bleeding from

the wound, it helps in clotting of the blood.

Functions of Blood :

Blood is an essential constituent of our body. It has various functions, such as —

l.

8.

Transportation of Food: Foods that we take are converted to simple
foods and get mixed up with blood. Food extracts are carried to different
parts of our body by blood. The body cells are nourished by this way.

Transportation of Oxygen: Oxygen is necessary for every activity
of the body. Organic cells cannot survive without oxygen. So oxygen
along with food is to be supplied to them. Haemoglobin of red blood
cells takes oxygen from the lungs and carry them as Oxy-hemoglobin to
every cell,

Carbon Dioxide Exchange: Blood plasma carries carbon dioxide from
cells of different organs to the lungs.

Expulsion of Waste Materials: Blood helps expulsion of nitrogenous
waste products.

Prevention of Diseases; When germs infect the body, white blood
cells kill them as preventive measures.

Transportation of Hormones: Ductless glands of the body produce
hormones. Bloods transport hormones to different parts of the body,
Control of Temperature: Blood carries temperature of different parts
and maintains temperature equilibrium of the whole body,

Clotting of Blood: If any part of the body gets cut, bleeding occurs.
Platelets help clotting of blood. As a result bleeding stops.

New Words: red blood cell, white blood cell, platelet, plasma, hormone, ductless

glands

Lesson : 9— 10: Blood Vessels

On the upper side of your palm, you can sce one type of blue coloured vessels.
These are veins. Veins are one type of blood vessels, What is a blood
54 Science

vessel? A vessel through which blood flows is called blood vessel. Our body
has three types of blood vessels. They are :

a)Artery b) Vein — c) Blood capillary

capillary

Fig- §.4: Artery. Vein & Capillary

a) Arteries: Blood carrying vessels originating from the heart, carry blood to
different parts of the body. They are placed at the inner side of the body.
Their wall is thick with small cavity and without any valve. Artery transports
oxygenated blood.

b) Veins: Vessels, through which blood from all over the body come back
to the heart are the veins Its walls are comparatively thin. Its cavity is large
with valves inside. Veins originate from the capillary network. With few
exceptions veins carry deoxygenated bloods (with carbon dioxide).

c) Capillaries: Artery having divided into branches and branchletes,
ultimately produces very fine tubes. These are called the capillaries or
capillary network. Veins originate from capillaries. The walls of the capillaries

are thin and composed of only one celled thick epithelial layer. Capillaries
stay surrounding the body cells.

Do yourself: — Fill up the following table and find out the differences
between artery and vein

Artery Vein

Valves

Cavity

Wall

Amount of oxygen

Amount of carbon dioxide

2025
2025

Digestive system and blood Circulation system 55

Heart:
Heart 1s a conical shaped organ situated in between two lobes of lung at the left

side of the chest cavity. It is covered with two layered thin membranes called
pericardium. Heart is composed of heart muscles. Heart muscles are
independent involuntary muscles, capable of expanding and contracting without
other’s control, Heart expands and contracts on average 72 times in every minute.
Keep your hand at the midpoint of your chest. Could you feel any rhythmic beat?
Why does it happen like this? It is due to expansion and contraction of the heart.
This is heart beat.

Do yourself: Count your friend’s heart beat with the help of your watch.

Heart is composed of three layers, such as
a) Outer layer or Epicardium b) Middle
layer or Myocardium c) Inner layer or
Endocardium. Myocardium is the thickest
among the layers. Its contraction pumps
blood for circulation.

Heart is a four chambered hollow organ.
Upper two chambers of the heart are right
and left atrium. Lower two chambers are eee
right and left ventricles. Walls of atria are ee ;

thin and that of ventricle are thick. Atria ———

and ventricles are separated by two walls. Atria are smaller in size than the
ventricles. In between right atrium and right ventricle there is atrio-ventricular
aperture. That aperture has three valves.

Blood can enter ventricles through these apurtures. Similarly, two-paneled
valves are present in between left atrium and left ventricle. Here also blood from
left atrium can enter into left ventricle only. Besides, Aorta and left ventricle
joint and pulmonary artery and right ventricle joint have similar valves. These
valves control the direction of one way blood flow.

Do yourself: Once Sagar’s father was ill. Sagar’s elder brother is a physician.
He placed his hand on his father’s wrist and was looking at the watch. Sagar
noticed it. At night he asked his elder brother what he was examining
placing his hand on father’s wrist. What is the name of the vessels on the
upper side of the hand’? His elder brother told him that he was examining
father’s pulse. What is a pulse? Beats created in the artery by alternate expansion
and contraction of heart are known as pulse. Artery remains in interior side

56 Science

while veins are on the upper surface of the body.

Now you examine your friend's pulse. Observe veins of his hands. Your friend
will examine your pulse. Now you run in your school field for five minutes. Tell
your friend to examine your pulse. Do you find any change? Physical labour
increases expansion and contraction of the heart that enhances the pulse rate.

Blood Circulation Through Heart:

Heart is formed by a special type of involuntary muscle called cardiac muscle,
When the heart contracts, blood from the heart flows through artery to the
different parts of the body. When the heart expands, blood from different parts
rush to the heart through vein. In this way blood flows from the heart to the
different parts of the body and comes back to the heart when the heart contracts
and expands,

New words: Valve, artery, vein, capillary, atrium, ventricle,
Lesson 11-12 : Heart Diseases

Mr. Aman is a bank employee. He has a medium fatty body. He likes to eat
fatty fish, meat and oily foods. He is a smoker. He works continuously from
morning to night. With mental labour he smokes too much. He scarcely goes
for walks or takes any physical exercise. One day after returning from the office,
suddenly he felt pain on the left side of his chest. Soon this pain became serious.
He lost his sense. His wife rushed him to a hospital. After examining him, the
doctor told that Mr. Aman is suffering from heart diseases. Now tell what are the
causes of heart diseases?
Causes of Heart Diseases: We have come to know about the causes of heart
diseases from the above stanza. These are :
- Taking too much fatty and oily foods.
- Not taking balanced foods,
- Too much smoking.
- Excessive mental labour.
- Not taking part in games, movements , walking or physical exercises ete.
Preventive Measures Against Heart Diseases:
1. Avoid taking high protein and starchy food.
2. Developing the habit of doing regular physical labour, such as playing,
walking, taking physical exercise.

2025
Digestive system and blood Circulation system a7

3. Taking balanced foods regularly.
Giving up the habit of smoking.

5. Trying to avoid too much heavy mental labour, too much mental pressure
and remain anxiety free.

6. Developing the habit of taking fresh fruits and vegetables.

7. Not allowing body weight to increase much. Overweight enhances blood
pressure of the heart. As a result heart is affected.

Do yourself: Draw a labeled diagram of heart, Show the pathway of blood
flow in the heart. Make a chart showing how awareness about heart disease
can be created.

What we learned from this chapter-

Artery: Originating from the heart, artery usually transports oxygenated blood
to all parts of the body. But pulmonary artery is the exception. This artery
carries deoxygenated blood to the lungs.

Vein: Originating from different parts of the body, veins carry deoxygenated
blood from all over the body to the heart. But the pulmonary vein is the
exception. Oxygenated blood comes to the left atrium through pulmonary vein.

Red Blood Cell: Hemoglobin pigment is present in the red blood cells.
Haemoglobin mixing with oxygen produces Oxyhaemoglobin.

Platelets: Platelets help blood to clot.

EXERCISE
Fill in the gaps:
1. Enzymes help in .
2 foods when digested are converted into amino acids.
3. Inred blood cells , a type of pigment is present.
4 helps in blood clotting.
5 functions as security guard of the body.

Forma-8, Science, Class-7
38 Science

Short answered questions:

Where and how digested foods are absorbed?

Explain the necessity of cleaning teeth.

Describe how foods move from the mouth to stomach.
Explain the importance of blood cells in your body.

What functions do the blood vessels perform in our body?

oe ee

Multiple choice questions:
1. Which one is the largest gland of the body?

a. Pancreas b. Intestinal glands
c. Gastric gland d. Liver
2. Which one is available in saliva?
a. Ptyalin and water b. Tripsin and water
c, Lipase and water d, Pepsin and water

Follow the stem and answer question nos. 3,4,5

3. Nucleus is absent in-
i, M,N ii. N.O ili, O, M

Which one of the following is correct?

a i biti c.iandii = d.iand iii
4. Function of P is to—
i. carry food extracts ii. act as security guard iii. help expulsion of wastes
Which one of the following is correct?
a. Landii b. i and iil c. i and iil d. i, ti and iti
5. Which one of the following helps blood to clot?
a. M b. N c. O d. P

Creative questions:
l. ae

a. What is villus? Q) id
b. Why should one brush teeth after taking foods? Explain. |_
ase

2025
2025

Digestive system and blood Circulation system 59

c. What are the functions of Y-marked part?
d. When Z-marked part is damaged, what are the problems arise in human body?

2.

a. What is Pericardium?

b, What does the word Lipase mean? Explain,

c, Explain arrow marked pathway of transportation of
blood in the stem.

d.Write with reasons why we should take care of the
organ in the stem to keep it healthy .

Do yourself:

1. How would you examine your friend's pulse? Examine your friend’s
pulse after physical exercise. Can you find any change ? Explain the causes of
these changes.

2. In a group, prepare a chart of the human digestive system and write down
the functions against each organ.
