2025

Chapter Thirteen

Environment and Pollution

Environment is composed of living and non-living things. You know there is
close relationship between living and non-living objects. Moreover, there are
some close relationships between organisms and other parts of the environment.
As a result, diverse and peculiar activities are going on continuously around us.
To his existence on earth, man uses various materials from the natural sources to
fulfill their needs, For this, people are engaged in some activities involving the
environment. So, such activities have few effect on some factors of the
environment.

After studying this chapter, we will be able—

> to explain what pollution is.

® to explain the causes of environmental pollution,

® to explain the effect of pollution on environment,

>» to explain the ways of preventing environmental pollution.

> totake initiative to create awareness in the society for,
conservation of environment

> to publish posters containing environmental pollution and its effects.

Lesson-1: Environmental Pollution

With the progress of civilization, environment around us is changing. People are
using the environment in various ways to meet their necessities. Nature or
human activities ot theit combined effect may bring changes in the constituents
of the environment and the environmental balance ts lost. As a result, life of
human beings, plants and other animals are affected. Discomfort prevails in the
environment for organisms. We term this condition as environmental pollution
and this affected environment is called polluted environment.
150 Science

Fig-13.1: Polluted environment

Work: Know about Environmental pollution.

Materials required: Note book, Pen.

Procedure: Observe environment of your school and your area. Study and
identify whether any pollution is occurred. Discuss the pollutions in your class
what you have identified.

Starting from minute microbes to all other organisms including human beings
live in this environment of the earth. No part of environment is free from
pollution. Human beings are not polluting their own environment only. Lite of
all other organisms and their environment are also affected. Living of plants and
animals including human beings, is disturbed by environmental pollution. Why
does pollution occur? Few harmful elements are polluting our environment
directly or imdirectly. We call them pollutants. Smokes emitting from the
chimmeys of different factories, thermal electric power house, and from the vehi-
cles; insecticides, chemical fertilizers used in the field; varieties of waste materi-
als, polythene, plastic etc. are the examples of pollutants. These pollutants
pollute different factors of environment in various ways.

2025
2025

Environment and pollution 131

Lesson-2: Causes of Pollutions of Environmental Elements

Environment is composed of mainly two Components: living and non-living
component. You know all plants and animals constitute the living factor.
Non-living elements include soil, water, air and all other non-living materials on
earth. Due to pollution both living and non-living factors are affected. As a
result all organisms including human are threatened in the environment. Now
the question is: what are the causes of environmental pollution?

Work: To know about the pollution of the environmental factors.

Materials required: Note book, Poster paper, Marker,

Procedure: Form groups with the help of your teacher. Observe in groups
the causes of pollution identified in the previous lesson by all of you. Identify
the sources of pollutants that pollute the factors of the environment.
Demonstrate in poster papers the causes and sources of pollution. Observe
the works of all groups and take part in class discussion.

The population of the world is increasing gradually, So increased quantities of
food, shelter and transport etc. are needed. To enhance the size of cultivable land
and building their houses people are destroying forests. As a result of increased
carbon dioxide gas, temperature of the earth is increasing. Besides, CFC (Chloro
Fluro Carbon) from aerosol and refrigerator is damaging the Ozone layer. For
the increased human population, besides food and shelter, a large number of
other materials are needed. So they build up various industries. Wastes from
these industries pollute environment. In this way environment of the earth is
polluted. In the following lessons you will learn about the pollutions of three
main factors of environment: soil, water and air.

Lesson-3,4: Soil Pollution

Soil is an essential factor for our living. Various crops that we take as food grow
in soil. Not only for food, we are also dependent on soil for other essential things
needed for Irving. such as shelter, clothing, medicines ctc. are the products of
plants. We are polluting soil in various ways. As a result soil is losing its fertility.
142 Science

Work: To know about soil pollution and its causes.

Materials required: Note book, Poster paper, Marker.

Procedure: Visit different parts of your area. Observe how soil is polluted.
Observe the sources of pollution and keep a note in your note book. Write
down the activities you will perform to make the people aware of the
preventive measures to be taken against soil pollution in your area in a
poster paper. Present it in the class and take part in discussion.

Causes and Sources of Soil Pollution:
The garbage and wastes that we throw,
bacteria help them to decay. As aresult, .. —
these wastes get mixed up with the soil
easily. Besides, now-a-days we use
such things that do not rot or get |
petrified in the soil. Such as: glasses, {
polythene, plastic etc. All these #
non-perishable things hamper normal
growth of plants. Besides these ge
materials, we pollute soil in various @yp4eq7d ws
ways. Among these pollutants, there are
different forms of garbage, fertilizers, Fig-13.2 : Soil Pollution
fungicides used in agricultural land and

industrial wastes etc.

Lesson: 5, 6: Pollution of Water

At present there is scarcity of safe drinking water in the world. Life is not
possible without water. Pollution of water is a subject to ponder over seriously.
Water is polluted in various ways. It is the man who is responsible for pollution
of water. It is not only our problem, it is a serious global problem.

Work: To know about water pollution; its causes and sources,

Procedure: Visit a water reservoir of your area, near your area, or pond or
river near your village home. Try to observe how water is being polluted. If
you do not have such water reservou, pond or river, then discuss with your
class mates how water is polluted in their area. Write it down in your note
book. Try to know the causes and sources of water pollution and take part in
class discussion.

2025
Environment and pollution 153

Causes and Sources of Water Pollution

Water may be polluted by various means. Human activities are the main cause
among other causes of water pollution. Due to urbanization and industrialization
sewage and industrial wastes have increased. As a result, water is being pollut-
ed.

Besides, for increased agricultural production various insecticides and chemical
fertilizers are used. They move from fields to the sea through river. They also
mix up with underground water and pollute it. You might have seen that
bamboo, cane and jute plants are immerged in ponds. Cows, Buffalos, and goats
are washed in ponds. Some unsafe latrines erected over different water bodies,
are responsible for water pollution.

Water may also be polluted due to some natural causes. You have heard about
flood. During flood excreta of domestic animals and birds along with human
feces mix up with water and pollute it. The leftover foods, filths, wastes. the
decomposed bodies of animals, various degradable substances used in domestic
work are thrown here and there. These waste products get mixed with the water
of ponds, lakes and rivers.

Fig- 13.3 : Water Pollution

Lesson-7, 8: Air Pollution

Our earth is surrounded by atmosphere. Man, other animals and plants live
within this atmosphere. Due to man made causes, quantities of some constituents
of air increase or decrease which is detrimental to environment and for us. The
changes in composition of air is known as air pollution. Atmosphere around the
earth has become polluted in vanous ways.

Forma-20, Science, Class-7
154 Science

Work: To know the causes and sources of air pollution.

Procedure: Observe the sources and causes of air pollution of your area, Write
down the man made and natural causes on a separate poster paper. Present it in
the class and take part in discussion.

Causes and Sources of Air Pollution

Air may be polluted by nature itself and by man. Environment scientists have
mentioned few causes of air pollution. Among these there are smokes expelled
from vehicles and industries. It contains carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide
gases. Black smokes emitting from the chimneys of brick fields also cause air
pollution. As a result, the atmosphere shows some abnormal changes. Moreover,
among other causes of pollution defective motor vehicles, trains, buses, tempo
etc. release smokes. This smoke contains carbon monoxide, carbon particles and
carbon dioxide which has detrimental effect to the environment. Smokes
released by vehicles are not the only cause of air pollution. Smoking, asbestos,
dust released form construction work and various kinds of waste materials ete.
make air polluted. One of the causes of air pollution is injudicious deforestation.
As a result, carbon-di-oxide which is absorbed by plants, increases in the air.

The examples of naturally occurring air pollution are toxic gas (CO, 8, SO2)
emissions associated with volcanic eruptions and forest fires that release smoke
and gases.

WA ou. 3 =a
1 a
KASS
Fig-13.4: Air Pollution

Lesson - 9: Effect of Pollution

‘You have learned about pollution of soil, water and air. Do you know what
effect they have on the environment ?

2025
2025

Environment and pollution 155

Work: To know about different types of pollution.

Procedure: Form groups with the help of your teacher. The groups will
make an observation of environment of your school and adjacent areas. See
what types of pollution is occurring in the area. Note down the effects of
these pollutions on human beimgs and other organisms after discussing
among the groups. Present your findings in the class on behalf of your group
and take part in the class discussion.

Effect of Soil Pollution

You have learned the cause of soil pollution is the increase of waste materials in
the soil. Various solid and chemical wastes are responsible for soil pollution.
Environment is damaged in different ways due to unplanned disposal of wastes.
Glass, aluminum, polythene thrown in the soil do not mix up easily with soil. As
a result, the fertility of soil is lost. You would be astonished to know that it takes
two and a half hundred years for aluminum to mix up with soil. Glass takes ten
lac years and polythene needs about one thousand years. These things make our
drains and water bodies silted and are responsible for water clogging. Next they
find their way to ponds, rivers, and sea. So these materials become threat to
every organism. Insecticides and chemical fertilizers used in agricultural lands
are harmful for all organisms. These chemicals mixing up with food stuffs
through plants may cause fatal diseases like cancer.

Effect of Water Pollution

You have learned that we pollute water in various ways. Drinking such water
people suffer from diseases like dysentery, diarrhoea , jaundice, typhoid etc. In
polluted water fish and other aquatic organisms cannot survive. As a result,
balance of the aquatic environment is disturbed.

Effect of Air Pollution

You have learned that air is polluted in various ways. When air is polluted, the
quantity of different gases in the air rises up. It has harmful effect on human
beings. When the quantity of carbon monoxide increases in the air, it may cause
diseases right from breathing problem to fatal diseases like cancer. Smokes
156 Science

from industrial plants may cause acid rain after mixing with air. Acid rains not
only harm human beings, aquatic animals are also affected. It also damages the
balance of aquatic environment.

Besides these, due to air pollution temperature of the earth rose much higher
than before. Scientists say that if the rise of temperature continues, the average
height of sea level will go up. As a result, the land of the coastal low lying areas
will be submerged. At the same time some areas will experience drought. So
there will be changes in local climate. As a result, not only human beings but
also innumerable plants and animals will perish from the earth. Consequently,
the earth will face problems from all sides.

Lesson-10: Prevention of Pollution and Conservation of
Environment

You have learned the causes of pollution of soil, water and air in different means.
Soil, water and air are essential for our life, But it is due to man, the environment
is gradually becoming unsuitable for habitation. All organisms will face threat of
extinction if the environment cannot be kept undisturbed and healthy. The only
way to keep the environment pollution free is to create awareness among the
people.

Work: To know the ways to create awareness about prevention and conservation
of environment.

Procedure: Form groups with the help of your teacher. Discuss in the group
what you can do to abstain yourself and others from polluting environment
and note it down. Prepare slogans to create awareness. And make
arrangements to exhibit them in your school.

One cannot think of the existence of the organisms without soil, water and air.
All of us should keep these environmental factors free from pollution and
conserve them properly. Due to the increase of population, the elements of the
environment are in enormous use. As a result different types of pollutions are
occurring continuously. For the prevention of pollution and conservation of
environment every body should take care of the following facts:

. To maintain healthy environment, measure should be taken to
prevent pollution of soil, water and air.

2025
2025

Environment and polhution 157

‘

os

Trees should be planted around houses, schools and road sides.
Defecation and urination in open places should be stopped.

Smokes emitting from industries should be treated to make them
pollution free before releasing to the environment by using modern
technology,

Use of plastic and polythene should be stopped. Instead jute goods may
be used.

Use of insecticides and chemical fertilizers should be reduced. Instead
manures and biological control of insects may be used.

Household garbage and food remains should be thrown to a particular
place and buried them under the soil, not throwing here and there.

People should be made aware of the harmful effects of pollution and the
process of conservation of environments.

Forests should be conserved. It should be kept in mind that these are the
habitats of different organisms. These plants help us keep our
environment pollution free.

What we learned from this chapter

When changes occur in different factors of environment, the environmental
balance is lost. As a result, unfavorable condition is created for man and
other organisms. We call this condition environmental pollution.

Different activities of man and nature are responsible for environmental
pollution, But for different pollutions human beings are mainly responsible.

Because of the pollution of soil, water and air, not only man but also
the existence of innumerable plants and animals will be endangered.

One of the main ways of preventing pollution and preserving environment 1s
to create awareness among the people.
158 Science

EXERCISE
Fill up the blanks

1. To increase cultivable land and build up houses, peoples cut
2. of industries are responsible for water pollution.

3, help to purify various wastes.

Short answered questions
1. Give an example how pollutions happen.

2. What can you do to make everybody of your area aware to prevent pollution?
3. What should you do to conserve the environment of your home?

4. What role can you play in the conservation of environment of your school?
5. Mention two impacts of water pollution.

6. Why is air pollution harmful for human beings?

Multiple choice questions

1. From which one is water supplied to the residential houses in urban areas?
a. Tubewell b. Pond c. River d. Beel

2. Causes of soil pollution are -
i. polythene and insecticide
ii. Garbage and dead bodies of organisms

iii Chemical fertilizers and glasses

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iand ii b. iand iii

c. iband il d. i, ii and til

2025
2025

Environment and pollution 159

Observe the scene and answer question no. 3 and 4 :

Fig: Smoke from the industries and deforestation

3. Which one is absent in part W of the imaginary scene ?

a, Carbon dioxide b. Oxygen

c. Chlorofluorocarbons d, Carbon monoxide

4. Ifthe occurrences represented in the scene happens on earth-
i, Ozone layer will be damaged
ii. Probability of acid rain will increase

iii, Green house effects will happen

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iand ti b. Land i c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
160

Science
Creative questions
1.
oe . a 5
Died fish and —— ; ilrem
aquatic insects ses SS J wster vessel
ae SEES ae
i ee al —
Fig: River
a. What is acid rain?
b. Why is plastic harmful for soil? Explain.
c. What are the problems faced by the animals shown in the stem? Explain.
d. What steps should be taken to balance the environment as shown in the
stem?
2.

Fig: Car

a. What is pollution?

b. Why is water pollution harmful?

c. What problem will P of the stem create? Explain.

d. What sort of contribution can we do to solve the problems created by the

stem? Explain with reasons.

2025
