104 Science

Lesson 1-4: Acid, base and indicators

Activity: To know about acid.

Necessary components: Lemon juice, litmus paper, beaker, forceps
Methodology: Take 2-3 mililitre of lemon juice. First dip the red litmus paper
into the lemon juice holding it by forceps. Did the colour of the paper change?
No, it did not. Now dip the blue litmus paper. Is there any change of colour?
Yes, the colour of the litmus paper changed from blue to red.

Do you know the reason for the change

Litmus paper is prepared from ordinary paper by using the colour from the
leaves of a tree called Lichens. Litmus papers obtained in this way look red.
When the litmus paper is fermented in any alkali solution, it turns blue. On the
other hand, when the blue litmus paper is treated with acid. it tums red litmus.

In lemon juice, there is Citric
acid. When red litmus paper is
dipped, no chemical reaction
takes place, and consequently no
change of colour of the litmus
paper is observed. On the other
hand if you dip blue litmus paper
in Citric acid, chemical reaction
takes place and consequently
there is change of colour,

 , Activity: Divide

7 your-selves in groups.
Take some vinegar,
Carambola or Orange
juice instead of lemon
juice. Examine them
with red and blue litmus
paper. Observe the
change of colour,

Thus we can say that one of the properties of acids is to change the blue litmus
paper into red. Do you know why just like lemon juice amloki, koromcha,
carambola, lime, grape juices are sour?

The reason is that those fruits have different types of acids in them. Thus we can
say acids laste sour.

A list of fruits and the acid present in each are given in the table below:

Name of the Fruit The type of acid present
Grapes, Orange, Lemon Citrie acid

Tamarind Tartaric acid

Tomato Oxalic acid

Amol Ascorbic acid

Apple, Pineapple Malic acid

2025
Acid, Base and Salt 105

Activity: To know about bases.

Necessary components: Lime, beaker, water, red and blue litmus papers,
hand gloves, stirrer, forceps, dropper, spatula

Methodology: Put on the hand glove and take 5 to LO gram of lime in the
beaker using spatula. Now slowly add 100 milliliter of water to it by the
dropper. Shake the mixture with the stirrer properly. Keep the mixture for ten
minutes, separate out the clean solution from the top of the mixture carefully.
This clear solution is hme water. Now dip in the red and blue litmus paper in
turn. What change do you see in the colour of the litmus papers?

You will see that the red litmus paper turns blue in colour, but the blue litmus
paper does not change its colour. Later you will know about colour change in
detail.

Those materials which have chemicals like Ca(OH) as in the lime water turn red
litmus paper into blue and are called base. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is a base
which is a component of soap. This is used in paper and rayon industry.

Indicator: The litmus paper that you have used above can indicate whether a
substance is an acid or base by change of colour. Materials like litmus paper
which identify whether a substance is an acid or a base or none of these are called
indicators. Like litmus paper methyl orange, phynophthylene, methyl red all
are indicators. These can be used to identify whether an unknown material is an
acid or a base or neutral.

Acid: Let us look at the symbol of some acids. Vinegar or acetic acid
(CH;COOH), oxalic acid (HOOC-COOR), hydrochloric acid (HCI), sulphuric
acid (H, SO, ).

Where lies the similarities in all these acids?

Mark that in all these substances, there is one or more hydrogen atoms. These
hydrogen atoms produce hydrogen ions (H*) in the presence of water. Thus we
can say that those chemical substances are acids which have one or more
hydrogen atom and produce H* in water.

H,O
HCl 2 Ht + cr
CH,COOH __ HO. = gt + CH; COO"

Is methane (CH4) an acid

No, it is not an acid. Methane has four hydrogen atoms, it does not produce H*
in water. Now let us look at 2 bases. For example, sodium hydroxide (NaOH)
and calcium hydroxide [Ca(OH):].

Forma-|4- Science, Class-8
106 Science

Those chemical substances which have hydrogen and oxygen atoms and
produce hydroxide OH- in water are base.
naon = RO, + OH”

H,0 _
Ca(OH), 2 » Ca® + 20H

However, there are some chemical substances like calcium oxide or lime,
ammonia (NH,) which do not have oxygen and hydrogen atoms, but they
produce OH” in water. They are also called base.

CaO + H,0 ———> Ca (OH)
NH; + H,0 —___> NH,OH

Base: You have known before that a base is a metal oxide or a hydroxide, There
are some bases which dissolve in water. There are also some bases which do not
dissolve in water. The bases which are dissolved in water are called alkali. Thus
alkali is a special kind of base. NaOH, Ca(OH), and NH,OH are alkalis. These
are also called base. On the other hand aluminium hydroxide [Al (OH),] does
not dissolve in water and that is why it is a base but not an alkali. We can,
therefore say that all alkalis are base but all bases are not alkali.

You all know that when you touch soap, you feel shippery. The reason is that
soap contains base. Therefore we can say that a common property of alkali and
soap is that both of them are slippery. Again both bases and alkalis taste basic. It
is to be remembered that we should not examine the taste of an alkali in the
laboratory.

Lesson 5-6 : Use of acids and bases

Do you know how commonly used bleaching powder is produced’? It is
produced by the chemical reaction between dry calctum hydroxide and chlorine
gas (Cl, ). Again the dilute solution of calcium hydroxide or lime water 1s used.
for the white wash of our buildings. On the other hand the pest of calcium
hydroxide with water, known as milk of lime is used as insecticide.

Do you know why antacid is used when there is acidity in our stomach?

Antacid medicine is basically magnesium hydroxide [Mg(QH),] which can be
obtained both in suspension or as tablets. The magnesium hydroxide [Mg(OH), |
suspension is more commonly called milk of magnesia. Some times antacids
contain aluminium hydroxide [Al(QH)s].

2025
2025

Acid, Base and Salt 107

Acids that are formed in fruits and vegetables are called organic acids. These are
edible and some are essential for our health. For example ascorbic acid is so,
which we know as vitamin C. In its absence man suffers from scurvy. On the other
hand, there are acids like hydrochloric acid (HCI), sulphuric acid (H,SO,),
phosphoric acid (H;POx), nitric acid (HNO; ), perchloric acid (HC 104) which are
obtained from different mineral products gathered from nature. These are called
mineral acids. These are not edible. We can rather say that these are harmful for
human body. Mineral acids when come in contact with human skin, can cause
great damage to it.

You might have heard that some criminals in our society throw acid on human
body causing serious burn. What type of acid are those? These are mineral acids.

Do you know what the punishment for throwing acid is? It is very high and can
lead to death penalty.

By throwing acid, people are doing great crimes as also wasting valuable acids
which could be used in industry. We have to put up protests against it and make
people conscious. For this, we can make posters and distribute them among the
people. We can thus try to save our society from the dangerous crimes like acid
throwing and can prevent the wastage of our valuable mineral acids as well.
There is no denying the fact that the use of acids in our day to day life and in
industries is indispensable. The chemical that we use to clean our toilets contain
acid. The goldsmith uses nitric acid when he makes ornaments of gold. We use
battery in our IPS, car, and microphone and for stormg solar energy in solar cells
in which sulphuric acid is used. You might have known that sometimes people
use carbolic acid to protect their houses from snakes.

There is acid in our stomach to digest the food we eat, this is hydrochloric acid.
One of the most important components in fertilizer industries is sulphuric acid.
Other than this, lot of H,SO, is used in the preparation of chemicals starting
from detergents, paints, medicine, insecticide, paper, explosives and rayon.

The state of progress of a country in respect of its industrial development is
usually judged by the quantity of H,SO, it uses.

HClis used in steel mills, medicine industries, leather industries etc. HN0Os
is used in fertilizer industry for the production of explosives, for extracting
precious metals like gold from the mine and with fuels for rockets.
108 Science

Lesson 7-10: Some important properties of acid and alkali
Activity: Observing the reaction of hydrochloric acid with limestone

Necessary Components: Limestone, spatula. dilute hydrochloric acid, dropper,
apron

Methodology: Put on the apron. Grind the limestone. Take the clay powder in the
spatula. Now go on adding dilute hydrochloric acid to the powder of clay in the
spatula drop by drop. Do you find any change’? Is there bubbles created? Yes, there

are bubbles creating foam. This happens because, when dilute hydrochloric acid is
added to clay stone (CaCQ3), there is a chemical reaction between calcium
carbonate and hydrochloric acid. This produces calcium chloride and carbon
dioxide gas, which form bubbles. When the produced carbon dioxide is gone,
we see a transparent solution of calctum chloride in water.

All acids react with carbonate like hydrochloric acid and produce carbon dioxide.

caco; + 2HCL ——> caCh + HO + CO;*

You will be surprised to know that often this property of acids is used to produce
carbon dioxide to extinguish fire.

Can you say what reaction will take place between baking powder (NaHC03) and
hydrochloric acid? The reaction between baking powder and hydrochloric acid
produce sodium chloride, water and carbon dioxide gas.

NaHCO, + HCl ——+ NaCl + HO + CO, +

You have learned in your lower class what reaction takes place when lemon juice or
vinegar 18 added to baking powder. Do you remember it? Write down the reaction that
takes place in this case.

Activity: To observe what happens when acid is added to metals.

Necessary components: Zn as metal, dilute hydrochloric acid, spirit lamp, test tube, apron
Methodology: Put on the apron. Fill half of the test tube with dilute hydrochloric
acid. Add a little amount of zinc to the test tube. Do you find bubbles coming out?
If not heat the test tube lightly. Do you now find bubbles of gas?

This is bubble of hydrogen gas which is produced by the reaction between zinc and
hydrochloric acid. You can test whether the gas is hydrogen by an experiment. Take a
lighted match stick near the open end of the test tube. What do you see? It is burning
with a sound. [fit was any gas other then hydrogen, it would not produce any sound.

Zn + 2HCI > ZnCl, + H+

Like hydrochloric acid, any other acid produces hydrogen gas by reacting with
metals.

2025
2025

Acid, Base and Salt 109

Activity: To observe the reaction between acid and lime water.

Necessary components: Lime water, sulphuric acid, beaker, red litmus paper, stirrer,
forceps, dropper

Methodology: Prepare lime water. Take 10 millimeter of lime water in a small beaker.
Now dip red litmus paper in the lime water with the help of the forceps. ‘The litmus
paper turns blue from red. This proves that lime water is alkaline. Now add dilute
sulphuric acid to it slowly using the dropper and go on sturmyg. By dipping litmus paper
in the solution of the beaker ,find out what type of change in colour occurs. In this way,
go on adding H, 50, gradually and continue the test with litmus paper. At one state you
will find that no change of colour occurs.

Why the colour of litmus paper is not changing?

The reason is that the calcium hydroxide [ Ca(OH),| present in lime water by
reacting with the added sulphuric acid H,SO,, produce calcium sulphate and
water. As a result the amount of Ca(OH), decreases gradually. When all the
amount of Ca(OH), completes its reaction with H,SO,, the litmus paper no
longer changes its colour.

Ca(OH)» + HpS04 >» CaSO, + hbo
Base Acid Salt water

Here the produced calcium sulphate is a salt. Thus we can say that base and acid
reacts to produce mainly salt.

Let us look at the reaction between some other bases and acids and the produced
salts

Base Acid Salt Water
NaQH + HCl > NaCl + Ha
KOH + HNO; . KNO; + H30

It is to be noted that salt is produced not only by the reaction between base and
acids. Other reactions may also produce salt. For example, reactions between
metals and acids may produce salts.

Mg + 2HC1 MgCl, + H,t
Na + 2HCl >» Nac + H,*
Again acid reacting with carbonate, which is a salt, can produce salt.

NaxCO3 + 7HC1 —————> 2NaCl + HOO + CO, +
110 Science

Lesson 11-13 : Acid, alkali and salt identification

Activity: To observe if there 1s change of colour on littnus paper when dipped in
the ordinary salt solution in water,

Necessary Components: Beaker, stirver, table salt water, red and blue litmus paper, forceps

Methodology: Take 50 mililitre water in a beaker and add 10-15 gram of table
salt to it. Stir it thoroughly with the stirrer. Now using the forceps. first dip the
blue litmus paper and then the red litmus paper in the salt solution, Do you find
any change in colour of the litmus papers? No change of colour will be observed.
What is ihe reason?

The reason is that there is no acid or base in the solution. If there was acid, the
blue litmus paper would turn red and if there was any base, the red litmus paper
would turn blue.

This is only table salt dissolved in water, which is a neutral substance and
therefore is neither acidic nor alkaline to cause a change in colour. There are
other salts which are neutral like table salt which means these will cause no
change of colour of litmus paper.

Sometimes, due to impurity, there can be acid or base in polluted water. In those
cases there can be change of colour of litmus paper, although water is neutral in
pure form.

Activity: How to examine the acid or base prepared from the extracts of flowers
and vegetables.

Necessary components: Petals from Joba, Baganbilash and yellow Krishnochura
and leaves from cabbage, Beets, creeping herb, six beakers, stirrer, water, bunsen
bumer or gas burner, filter paper, bottle, paper and pencil, lemon juice, vinegar,
sour card, lime water, baking powder, soap water, sodium hydroxide, hydrochloric
acid, a piece of glass, dropper

Methodology: Collect the samples of the flowers and vegetables listed above.
Taking samples from the individual flowers and vegetable in separated beakers
add appropriate amount of water and then heat them in a burner, When the water
reduces to half the original volume, cool down the mixtures. Filter and put the
extracts in different bottles with specific marks. Now put lemon juice, lime water,
sour curd, vinegar, soap water, baking powder, HCl, NaOH in different test tubes
and mark them. Taking little extracts from each bottle add them to each test tube
and shake well. Do you find any change in the colours of the extracts? Make a
chart with identification of the substances as found out by the change of
colour to red or blue. From this chart you can see which materials are acids
and which materials are bases,

20235
2025

Acid, Base and Salt ill

Write down in change of colour for each extract. Now examine each material
with red and blue litmus paper and find out which of them are acids and which
of them have the characteristics of a base. Materials are classified as belonging
to the same group when they respond in the same way through the change of
colour.

New words : Acid, base, indicators, litmus, lime water, antacid

What we have learned at the end of this chapter-

- The materials which produce hydrogen ions when dissolved in water are
sour or acids.

- Acids turn blue litmus paper to red. Acid tastes sour.

- Metallic oxide or hydroxide is bases. Bases turn red litrous paper to blue.

- Alkalis are those bases which dissolve in water. Bases taste basic.

- Whether a material is an acid, a base or neutral substance can be judged from
the change of colour indicators.

- Salt is a neutral material which produced by the chemical reaction between
an acid and a base.

- From the reaction of acid with metallic carbonate or bicarbonate - salt, water
and carbon dioxide are produced.

- Through the reaction between acids and metals, salt and hydrogen gas are
produced

Exercise
Fill in the blanks
1. Acids produce in. water.
2. Alkali is a kind of base which are
3, All alkalis are but all are not alkalis,
4. By the reaction of acids and bases are produced.
5. Antacids are like materials.
112 Science
Short Answer Questions

What is the main difference between an acid and a base?
Explain the sentence -all alkaline are bases but all bases are not alkalis.

What type of chemical reaction occurs when carbon dioxide is
introduced in lime water? Describe with corresponding reaction.

a> —

faa

4. Does litmus paper change colour due to salt or pure water? Give
explanation in favour of your answer.
5. what do you understand by indicators?

Multiple Choice Questions

1. What type of acid is there in tomato?
a. Acetic acid b. Oxalic acid
c. Maleic acid d. Citric acid

2. Which acid is edible?
a. HNO, b. HCl
c. H3504 d. CH;COOH

Read the following sentence and give answers to questions no.3 and 4

Adil once carried out a reaction between zine and hydrochloric acid.

3, The compound produced by the reaction 1s -

i. salt
ii. base
i. alkali
Which one of the following is correct?
a. 1& ti b. i& iii
c. i & iii d. i. ii & iii

4. What will be produced if there is a reaction between the carbonate containing
salt and the second compound?

a.. Hz b. O2
c. COs d. Ch

2025
Acid, Base and Salt 113

Creative Questions

1. Farah likes only fatty food. Recently he is ofien feeling stomach pain. When
he met the doctor he was told that he has got acidity. Doctor besides advising
him about changing his food habit, prescribed him a medicine.

a.
b.

c.

d.

What is salt?
What is meant by milk or lime?
What type of medicine did the doctor prescribe and why did he do sa?

What type of compound is in the component that is producing the acid
referred in the paragraph? And why? Explain.

2. Mansura occasionally chews betel leaves. One day she put lime in water in a
pot. After some time, she observed that the pot has become hot. She also
marked that when she was taking some lime from the pot, the lime water
tured cloudy due to her breath reaching the lime water.

a.

b,
c.
d.

What is Alkali.

Why the lime water turned cloudy?
Explain the various uses of the watery compound in Mansura's pot.

Explain the fact that the first compound in the paragraph shows the
properties of both an alkali and base.

Task: Give a presentation of the list that you have prepared on the various acids,
bases and salis that are used in our households.

Forma-|5- Science, Class-8
