2025

Chapter Eight

Chemical Reaction

Different types of chemical reaction are going on around us. There chemical
reactions are some times releasing energy, sometimes creating useful new
materials and sometimes helping us cure diseases.

At the end of this chapter we will be able to—

e explain different types of chemical reactions ;

® explain different types of energy transformations through chemical reactions;
explain the transformations of energy in dry cells;
explain electrolysis:
use properly the chemicals and different instruments in chemical experiments.
appreciate the contributions of chemical reactions in our life;

Lesson 1-2 : Symbol, formula and valency

In class seven, you have got some ideas about symbol and formula. According
to structure, chemists have divided all the substances of the world as elements
and compounds. Till now, 118 elements have been found out. Generally,
symbols are expressed by the first one or two letters of he English or Latin name
of the elements. The short expression of the element is called symbol. For
example :

Hydrogen H, Oxygen O, Calcium Ca etc.
Again, the short expression of molecule of compound is called formula. For

example : formula of hydrogen molecule H, , Oxygen molecule O,, Hydrogen
chloride molecule HCl etc.
a0 Science

To write the formula of compound, we need to know the valency of the element.
According to the number of valency of the element, elements form compounds
by chemical bondage. We can compare the valency of elements with our hand.
The elements having valency one, means it has one hand. Hydrogen and chlorine
both are one handed elements. So, their valency is one. Therefore, the formula
of hydrogen chloride is HC1. The valency of oxygen is two. It means, the one
atom of oxygen has two hands. Through these two hands, oxygen can be
attached with two atoms of one handed hydrogen. For this reason, the formula of
water is H20.

The valency of nitrogen and carbon are 3 and 4 respectively. So, the formula of
ammonia is NH; and methane is CH,. The formula of hydrogen chloride, water,
ammonia and methane can be shown in the following :

H H H
SF
A ) Hoo
“ |
H-Cl H 4H Hl H
Hydrogen chloride Water Ammonia Methane

It may be mentioned here that some elements have more than example : the
valency of sulphur is 2 and 4, Iron is 2 and 3 ete.

Therefore, the valency of the element means the number of hydrogen atom
attached to that element. At the time of formation of a compound, it is to be
considered that all the hands or valency of an element are satisfied.

Table : The valency of some elements and radicals

Element Walency-1 Valency-2 Valency-3 Valoncy-4
Noo-metal | Hydeogen (1) Oxygen (0) Nitrogen (N) Carbon (C}
Fluorine (F} Sulphur (5) Phosphorus (P) Sulphur (8)
Chlorme (C1) Carbon (C)
Bromine (Br)
lodine (1)
Metal Sodium (Na} Calcium (Ca) Alominiumn (Al) Tin (Sn) {ie}
Potassium (K) Magnesium (Mg) ron (Fe) (ic) Lead (Pb) (ic)
Copper (Cu} (ous) | Zine (Zn) Gold yAu) fic}
Silver (Ag) Iron (Fe) (ows)
Gold (An) (ous) Copper (Cu) (ic)
Tin (Sn) tous)
Lead (Pb} (oush
Radicals Ammonium (NH,*) | Carbonate (co, } | Phosphate (PO.?” }
Hydroxyl (OH ) Sulphate (80,2° )
Nitrite (NO, } Sulpkite (80,2)
Nitrate (NO,” }
Bicarbonate (HOO, }

2025
Chemical Reaction #1

In the above table 50,2, CO,*°, NO; NH," etc. group of atoms do not stay
independently. They participate in compound formation like elemental atom. This
sroup of atoms is called radical.

To write the molecular formula, the following rules are to be mantioned.

1. Lf the valency of the element or radical is same, it is not necessary to write valency
in the formula, Only element and radical are to be written together. For example:
CaO (calcium oxide), NHyCl(ammonium chloride}, NH,NO, (ammorium niirate) etc.

2. lfthe valency of one element is any multiple of valency of another element, the valency
of both elements is divided by that multiple. Then the divided result is exchanged and is
written as suffix. For example: carbon dioxide C,O, — CO,. Here the valency of
carbon and oxygen is respectively 4 and 2.

3, Ifthe valency of both clements is different but not any multiple like valency of A is X and
the valency of B is Y then the formula of compound formed- with A and B is Ay Bx, The
valency of element A is written at the suffix on B and the valency
of element B is written at the suffix of A. For example alluminium oxide ( Al,O,)

Lession 3-4 : Chemical equation

To describe the chemical reaction we need to know about chemical reaction, A
chemical reaction can be divided into two parts.

One part contains the reactants and in the other part, the prodcuts or the newly
formed substances. For example :

5 + 0, : > 50,
Sulphur Oxygen Sulphur dioxide

Reactants represent the prior state of the reaction and products the resultant state
of the chemical reaction. In any chemical reaction, atoms cannot be created or
destroyed; but they are rearranged only. The total number of atoms present in the
teactants before the reaction always equals the total number of atoms of the
product afier the reaction. So the reactants and their product have the same
number of atoms of a specific element. In the light of the above discussion,
chemical equation may be defined as follows:

A chemical equation is a shortened expression of a chemical reaction, It uses
some symbols, formulas and some mathematical signs to denote the reactants
and the products. For example :

Zn + H,50, ———?> ZnSO, + H,
Zine Sulphuric acid Zinc sulphate Hydrogen

Forma-11- Science, Class-8
82 Science

The rules of writing chemical equations

1, In a chemical equation the formula or symbols of the reacting substances or
reactants are written on the left of the sign of eugality (=) and the symbols or
formulas of the products are written on the right of it.

2. Ifthe reactants or products are more than one, a plus ( +) sign is put between
the formula and the symbols.

3, Ifthe number of molecule is more than one then the number is used before
the formula.

4, An arrow sign (—+) is used to indicate that the reaction moves towards the
products from the reactants. Instead of an arrow sign, an equals sign ( =)
may also be used. However, the equation has to be balanced on both sides.

5. The number of atoms of different elements present in the reactants before
chemical reaction must be equal to the number of atoms of different elements
in the predcuts formed after the reaction. So, to make balance the symbol or
formula must be multiplied by the required number.

To balance the chemical equation

Hydrogen reacts with oxygen to prodcue water. So the formula of hydrogen and oxygen
is to be written on the left of the equals sign ( =) and the formula of the product will
be written on the right. The reaction may be expressed as follows :

Hy = 0;

The number of H and O atoms before the reaction and their numbers alter the
reaction should be same. To make the number equal it will have to multiplied on
the right side by 2. The equation now stand as :

H,0

2H, + 0, = 21,0

From the above equation the total number of oxygen and hydrogen atoms
before and after of the reaction can be calculated :

2H, a 0, = 2H,0
(22) + (1*2) = 2x (2+])
or, 4 + 2 - 2x3
or, 6 - 6

Therefore, the number of atoms before and after the reaction is equal.

2025
2025

Chemical Reaction 83

Lesson 5 : Chemical reaction: addition

Activity: Understanding addition reaction

Necessary components: test tube, mortar, spirit lamp or burner, iron powder,
sulphur, balance

Methodology: Properly clean the test tube and dry it. Using the balance measure
1 gram of iron powder and 4 gram of sulphur (keeping the ratio same different
amounts of iron and sulphur can be taken) and grind them together in the mortar.
Put the powders in the test tube. Now heat the bottom of the test tube using the
flame low while heating. When the mixer in the test tube becomes red hot, stop
healing, keep the test tube above the mortar so that in case the test tube breaks the
materials im it will not be spoiled. After cooling the test tube, break it and separate
out Its contents.

The material that you obtain from the test tube will look deep gray. You will see
that the light yellow sulphur or iron in it. became the iron powder and the
sulphur chemically combined to produce a new material called ferrous sulphide.

Fe + Ss > FeS
Iron Sulphur ferrous sulphide

This type of chemical reaction in which more than one element combined to
produce a new kind of chemical substance is called synthesizing reaction, In the
same way zinc and sulphur can chemically react to produce zinc sulphide.

7 + 5 7ns
Ane Sulphur Zinc sulphide

It is to be mentioned here that in the above two reactions compounds are formed
from elements. However, it is also possible that two compounds can chemically
combine to form a new compound. For example, ammonium chloride is
produced by adding hydrogen chloride with ammonia.

NH3 + HCl > NHgCl
Ammonia Hydrogen Chloride Ammonium Chloride

Lesson 6-7 : Combustion reaction

Activity: Observation of combustion reaction between sulphur and oxygen.
Necessary components: A combustion spoon with a long handle, some
amount of sulphur, spirit lamp or burner

Methodology: Take some sulphur in your combustion spoon. Go on heating
the spoon with the flame of your burner. What do you find?

a4 Science

First you will see sulphur to melt and then you will see blue flame and smell a
pungent smell. The heating of sulphur reacts with oxygen in the air and produces
sulphur dioxide (SO,) gas which gives pungent smell.

5 + Oz - * 502

Sulphur Oxygen Sulphur dioxide

Activity: Observation of combustion reaction between magnesium and
oxygen,

Necessary components: Magnesium ribbon, forceps (cight centimeter).
Spritlamp or burner

Methodology: Wear protective spectacles. Hold the end of the ribbon on the
flame you can do it by a lights also, Observe carefully, what happens?

The ribbon catches fire and a bright flame is seen. It happens because
magnesium bums due to the reaction with the oxygen of the air and we see the
flame. When all the magnesium is burnt out, the flame will extinguish
automatically, Do you find anything like ashes? It is actually magnesium oxide
which has been formed through the burning of magnesium in oxygen.

2 Mg + Oz - +  ZMgO

Magnesium Oxygen Magnesium oxide

Activity: To know the process of burning of a candle.

Necessary components: Candle, match

Methodology: Ignite the candle using a match stick. Observe carefully what
is happening? With the passage of time the size of the candle reduces. Due to
burning the candle melts at the top by the heat produced. A small part of the
melted wax flows down the candle, but most of the melted wax turns into
vapour by being sucked up through the wick of the candle. This vapour, by
combustion process, reacts with the oxygen in the air and produce heat and
light.

2025
2025

Chemical Reaction 85

Lesson 8-9 : Substitution or displacement reaction

Activity: Observing the reaction between iron and copper sulphate.

Necessary components: [ron powder, copper sulphate, water and test tube

The procedure: Fill the test tube with water to one forth its volume. Take some
coppersulphate in it and shake to make a solution of copper sulphate. Now put in
some iron powder in this blue solution of copper sulphate and shake thoroughly. Do
you find any change? The blue colour of solution is gradually turning into green and
small particles are forming at the bottom of the test tube. Why the blue colour of
the solution turns green?

Here a chemical reaction has taken place, as a result ferrous sulphate and copper
have been formed. The colour of iron sulphate is light green which turns the blue
colour of the solution into light green.

Fe + CusO4 ———————+ FeSQ4 + Cu
Iron Copper sulphate ferrous sulphate Copper
In this reaction iron is removing copper from copper sulphate and occupying its

place to form ferrous sulphate and pure copper.

This type of chemical reaction, where an element replaces another element from
a compound and occupies its place producing a new compound is called
displacement reaction.

You can add zinc, magnesium ete. and see what type of change occurs.

Decomposition rection

Activity: Observing the decomposition reaction of limestone.

Necessary components: Limestone, spatula or spoon, test tubes, lime water, outlet
tube, bunsen burner or spirit lamp, clamp, stand, cork and hand gloves
Methodology: Wear the hand gloves and with the help of the spatula take 5 gram
of limestone in the test tube. Now heat the bottom of the test tube with the flame of
the burner. Observe very carefully.

Carbon dioxide is being produced. The limestone which was taken in the test
tube decomposed into carbon dioxide gas and formed calcium oxide due to
heating ..

CaCO3 heat, CaO " CO>
Calcium carbonate (limestone) Calcium oxide Carbon dioxide

Now you can examine whether the gas is carbon dioxide or not. Take 1-2
milliliter of lime water in the other test tube and fix it as shown in the figure. You
will see that the lime water is turning opaque. The carbon dioxide thus produced
passed through the outlet tube to the second test tube and caused reaction there
between lime water and carbon dioxide. The lime water becomes opaque due to
the formation of calcium carbonate.

86 Science

CO> + Ca(OH) CaCO +4 HO
Carbon dioxide Lime water Calcium carbonate ‘Water
Examples of decomposition reactions are given below :
If copper carbonate is heated, it breaks and produces copper
oxide and carbon dioxide.
CuCO3 heat cu 4, CO»
Copper carbonate Copper oxide Carbon dioxide

On the other hand when potassium chlorate is heated it
decomposes into potassium chloride and oxygen gas.

2KCIO3 heat 2KCl + 309 Fig. &.1:Decomposition
Potassium chlorate Potassium chloride Oxygen

Lesson 10-11: Transformation of energy through chemical reaction

Your Activity: You have known what type of chemical reaction goes on when
a candle burns. Can you say now if any energy transformation occurs here? If
you put your hand near the candle you feel hot. Again if the candle is ignited in
the dark things become visible. We can therefore say that we feel hot because the
burning candle produces heat and we can see things around the candle because
it produces light. Candle is a chemical substance. When it is burned, the
chemical energy stored in it transforms into heat energy and light energy. We
use heat energy for cooking. Thus we find that chemical reaction cause
transformation of energy.

Activity: The reaction between baking soda and lemon juice.

Necessary components: Baking soda, lemon juice, dropper

Methodology: Take some baking soda in a test tube. Gradually add lemon juice to
it by using the dropper. What do you find? ‘There will be lot of bubbles. If you touch
the bottom of the test tube do you feel it cold?

Lot of citric acid is present in the lemon juice which reacts with the baking soda to
produce sodium citrate, carbon dioxide gas and water. The bubbles you see are
nothing but carbon dioxide gas.

Baking soda + Citric acid -——+ Sodium citrate + Carbon dioxide + Water

Why is the test tube felt cold? The reason is that the reaction absorbed heat.

2025
2025

Chemical Reaction a7

Now you can add vinegar to baking soda instead of lemon juice and see what
happens?

Activity: Experiment for the reaction between lime water and vinegar.
Necessary components: lime. vinegar, beaker, hand gloves, dropper
Methodology: Using the hand gloves put some lime in the beaker. Now
gradually add vinegar with the help of the dropper. Touch the beaker by your
hand. Do you feel it hot? What is the reason? Here, due to the reaction
between lime and vinegar. Calcium acitate and water is formed and lot of
heat is released. Due to the generation of heat the beaker is felt hot.

CaO + CH,;,COOH —————-+ (CH,COO),Ca + H,0

Lime Acitic acid Calcium acitate Water
Here lime is alkaline substance and acitic acid is acidic substance. This type of
reaction where substances of opposite characteristics react with each others and
produce neutral substance is called neutralization reaction.

Now you can add lemon juice instead of vinegar and see what type of reaction
occurs?

Activity: Observation of the reaction between lime water and vinegar.
Necessary components: Lime, water, vinegar, beaker, hand gloves, spatula,
dropper

Methodology: Take five gram of lime ( different amount can also be taken).

Add 40 gram of water drop by using the dropper. Touch the beaker with
hand gloves on. Do you find any difference after adding water?

The beaker is getting very hot and the solution is bubbling as happens to boiling
water. Here due to the addition of water into lime, there is a chemical reaction
between them and calcium hydroxide is formed,

CaO +) HO + CaO),

Calcium Oxide ( Lime) Water Calcium hydroxide
The product Ca(OH)2 is well known as slaked lime. Slaked lime or Ca(OH)2
dissolves in water very slightly. Huge heat-energy is produce in this reaction. As

aresult, water evaporates. The saturated solution of Ca(OH)2 in water is called
lime water.

Keep the suspensions that you get from the above experiment for some time. The
clean water that you get at the top is lime water.
88

Lesson 12-14: Dry cells

Science

Dry cells are portable source of electrical energy. We use dry cells in torch light,
remote controller, toy cars and in many electric machines. We will discuss how

this cell is made and how it works.
To make such a dry cell first of all, ammonium

chloride (NH4Cl), charcoal powder and manganese
dioxide (Mn0,) to be mixed horoughly with little

+—— Metal cap (4)

i: : . . +4 Mixture of

water added to make a paste. This mixture is taken in (| ammoniam
icing : ' ' hlotide,

a cylindrical shaped zine container. A carbon rod is carbon st

introduced at the centre of the container in such a way ca

that it does not touch the zine container. At the top of
the carbon rod there is a metal cup. The upper part of
the cell is covered by a layer of pitch. The surface of
the zine cylinder acts as the negative electrode or as
the anode. The carbon rod with the metal cap acts as
the positive electrode or cathode.

Now let us see how it works-

oe ae oe

la. Zinc container (—}

Fig. #.2: Dry cell

transformation.

Activity: To make a electric circuit using a dry cell and observe the energy

Necessary components: An electric bulb, dry cell, two copper wires

Methodology: Connect one end of a copper wire to the anode of the dry cell.
Connect the other copper wire with the cathode of the dry cell. Now connect the
free ends of the copper wires through the bulb as shown in the figure. The bulb
will light up. This is because an electric circuit is completed through the cell,

bulb and the wires.

What type of energy transformation did take place here?
The completion of the electric circuit causes the bulb
to give light. This light is coming from the battery.
The source of energy of the cell is the chemicals used
in the cell. This means zine, charcoal powder,
ammonium chloride and manganese dioxide. We can
say the chemical energy stored in the chemicals in
the cell is the source of electrical energy.

-
“f

id _

——

~
eo

+

Fig. 6.3: Dry cell cirewit

2025
Chemical Reaction &9

Electrolysis

Activity: To know about electrolysis.
Necessary components: One dry cell, two copper wires, two zinc rods
(electrode), water, salt, one glassware.

Methodology: Take 300 milliliter of water, 30 ,-—* I\||- =
gram of sodium chloride in a glassware and stir | peey |
them thoroughly. Now connect the two zinc rods to
the battery using the copper wires as shown in the
figure. Look carefully at the zine rods. Do you find
bubbles of gas on the body of both the rods?

Nacl

fig 8.4: Electrolysis

Yes, the reason is that sodium chloride gets dissociated in aqua solution to
produce sodium ion (Na*) and chloride ion (CT )

NaCl — Nat + Cl

This is how water getting dissociated produces Hydrogen ion and Hydroxil ion.
Due to the flow of electricity through dissolved salt connected with battery.
Hydroxil ion and chloride ion go towards Anode. Chloride ion through
chemical reaction produces chlorine (Cl,) gas when it reaches anode. As a result
we find bubbles on the anode, on the other side, Sodium ion and Hydrogen ion
(H') produce H, through chemical reaction by reaching cathode. As a result the
bubble of hydrogen gas becomes visible on the cathode and Sodium ion (Na‘*)
and Hydroxil ion (OH ) remains in the solition.

cl + & Cl

Chloride ion electron Chlorine atom
cl + Cl > CL

Chlorine atom Chlorine atom Chlorine gas
H + e H

Hydrogen ion electron Hydrogen

H + H = H,

Hydrogen atom Hydrogen atom Hydrogen gas

Forma-12- Science, Class-8
50 Science

Due to the flow of electricity through Sodium Chloride solution Chlorine gas
produces on the anode and Hydrogen on the cathode and Sodium Hydroxide
remains in the solution.

The solutes that carries electricity in dissolved state and produces different
solutes by chemical reaction due to electricity is called Electrolyte.

All materials do not produce chemical reaction due to electric current. The
materials do not allow electric current to pass through in their dissolved state or
in the melted form do not take part in chemical reaction. These materials are
called non electrolyte. Sugar, glucose are such examples.

New words : Valency, radical, addition, combustion, displacement,

neutralization, anode, cathode, electrolysis, electrolyte, slack lime.
What we have learned at the end of this chapter

- According to the number of valency of the element, elements form compounds by
chemical bondage.

- The chemical equation reactants stay at the left side of the arrow and the products
stay at the right side.

- By addition reaction more than one substance can combine to form a new
material.

- By combustion reaction a substance can burn with the help of oxygen in the air and
produce lot of energy as heat and light.

- In substitution reaction an element can replace another element from a compound
and produce a new substance.

- A chemical reactions in which a compound is broken down to more than one new
substance is called decomposition reaction.

- By chemical reaction there is transformation of energy.

- Inneutralization reaction substances of opposite properties react to transform each
other into neutral substances. In the combustion reaction the chemical energy
generally transform into heat and light energy.

- When dry cell are used the chemical energy transforms into light or other form
of energy.

- Those materials which in the dissolved state or melted state allow electricity to
pass through it are called electrolyte.

- Those materials do not allow electricity to pass through them im melted or dissolved
state are called nonelectrolyte.

2025
2025

Chemical Reaction 91

Exercise

Fill in the blanks
are created by chemical reaction.
The chemical reaction between calcium oxide and carbon dioxide
forming calcium carbonate is a reaction.
By combustion reaction energy is produced.
In a dry cell the cylinder of zine act as ‘
Hydrochloric acid is electric substance,

bao

tn f U3

Short Answer Questions

What do you understand by combustion reaction? Give examples.
Explain what is meant by neutralizing reaction?

Explain what happens when water is added to lime?

Describe briefly the construction a dry cell.

“Poe he

Explain the main difference between electrolyte and non-electrolyte
substances with examples.

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Which one is slaked lime?
a, CaO b. CaCO;
c. CaCl d. Ca(OH)

2. From which of the decomposition reactions given below does a diver
gets his oxygen.
a. CaCO; b. CuCO,

c. KCIO3 d. NHgCl
In the light of the paragraph below, answer the questions no. 3 and 4

Shapna took some lime in a beaker in the lab. Then some vinegar is added by
a dropper. After some time she touched the beaker to find out the change of
temperature.

3. What type of chemical reaction will occur between the compounds?
a. Combustion b. Neutralizing
c. Addition d. Substitution
a2 Science

4. The reaction between the compounds will produce —
i. calcium acetate
ii. calcium carbonate

iii, water

Which one of the following is correct?
a. i & ii b. i & iii
c. it & tii d. i, ti & iit

Creative Questions
1. Fahad and Farhan carried out some chemical reactions, which are as follows:

i. Carbon + Oxygen heat

ts

ii. Lime stone heat

fa

iti, Hydrogen + Oxygen ——————>
iv. Zine + Sulphuric acid ——————>

What is the symbol of baking powder?
What is the type of number ti. reaction, explain?

c. Explain the generation of gas of elements in the above stimulation
reactions.
d. Although the reactions i. and ii. are additive, there is some difference
between them, explain
2. Rita was watching the dance of her doll by connecting the battery of her doll.
At this moment the electricity went off and her younger sister Oishori
brought a lighted candle.

a. What is the neutralization reaction?

b, Whatis meant by lime water?

c. Explain the construction of Rita's battery.

d. Explain how the energy of battery of the doll and the candle transforms.
Project: Form a group of 4 to 5 and identify 5 chemical reactions which are
closely related to our day to day life. Think whether there is
transformation of energy in these reactions. If there are transformations

of energy, try to find out. Make a report, what kind of transformation occure
during the translformation of energy.

2025
