Chapter Fourteen
Environment and Ecosystem

You know, our environment comprises of everything that we have around us. It is
also known to you that, the living organisms and non-living matters of an area
constitute the environment of that particular area. You must have observed that,
there are different types of environment on earth. We may categorise them into
three main heads, namely, fresh water, marine water and land. Each of these
three environment also have special types of biotic and abiotic factors.

These living and non-living components are interrelated with each other. You
know, among living components of the environment, there are plants and
animals of different types. For survival, these plants and animals are
interdependent and interrelated with each other.

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to—

explain different environmental components and environmental types;
explain food chain and food web;

explain the flow of energy in the ecosystem;

analyze the role of ecosystem in maintaining environmental ( ecological)
balance;

e realize the impact of ecosystem on living beings and make aware of the
protection of ecosystem.

Forma-20- Science, Class-8
154 Science

Lesson 1 : Ecosystem

There are different types of living organisms in different environment of the
world. In different regions of each habitat, there exists a vast dissimilarity in
their climatic condition, weather and other abiotic and biotic factors. For these
dissimilarity, the earth is inhabitated by various different types of organisms.
The organisms you see in the forest are different from those inhabitated in the
pond. There is a close relationship between biotic and abiotic components of
these environment. Further, the animals, plants of an environment are
dependent on one another for their survival. In this way, the living component of
a particular environment is functioning and interacting with the abiotic
components to form a relatively stable system, called ecosystem.

If you observe environment, you will see there is a continuous action-reaction
among different components of the ecosystem. The garden near your house or
school is the example of a small ecosystem.

Lesson 2 : Components of ecosystem

As you know, ecosystem consists of abiotic (non-living) and biotic (living) components.

Abiotic components: All non-living components of an ecosystem is abiotic
components. These are classified into two categories: (a) Inorganic or physical
components and (b) Organic substances. Inorganic component consists of
minerals, soil, light, water, air, temperature, humidity, etc. Dead and
decomposed organic materials of living organisms are known as organic
substances. These inorganic and organic components are very essential for the
survival of the living organism.

Biotic components: Biotic components include plants, animals and
micro-organisms. As you have learnt in lesson one, there is an interrelationship
between biotic and abiotic components. To keep ecosystem functional, these
living organisms play certain role and on the basis of their contribution biotic
components are of three types, for example - (a) Producer (b) Consumer and (c)
Decomposer,

(a) Producers: The green plants can produce food hence called producers of
the ecosystem. They manufacture carbohydrate food in presence of sunlight by
the process of photosynthesis. All the animals of an ecosystem are directly or
indirectly dependent on this food.

(b) Consumers: The animals which live on eating organic matters obtained
from plants or on other animals are known as consumers. These consumers are
again divided into three groups-

Primary consumers: All animals which consume plants or plant parts are
known as primary consumers. They are also called herbivores. From minute
insect to many large animals are included in the group of herbivores. For
example- cow, goats etc.

2025
2025

Environment and Ecosystem 155

Secondary consumers: Those which live on eating primary consumers. For
example frog, bird, man etc. They are also called carnivores.

Tertiary consumers: Animals which feed on secondary consumers are called
tertiary consumers. For example- frog, tortoise, stork, man etc. Some of these
animals take food from more than one food level (trophic level). They are called
omnivores. When we take pulse. rice, potato etc. we are primary consumers or
herbivore. But when we eat fish and meat , we are secondary or tertiary
consumers.

(c) Decomposers: These are wide range of microorganisms including bacteria
and fungi. After the death of plants and animals these micro-organisms act on
their bodies and decompose. Finally, the decomposed body forms different
organic and inerganic components. Some of the nutrients are used by them and
the rest are mixed up with the soil and air. The green plant again consumes those
as a natural process. These action and reaction, between the biotic and abiotic
components of the nature, has created the ecosystem as a potential
self-supporting ecological unit.

Lesson 3-5 : Types of ecosystem

In natural environment, there are two types of ecosystem. They are ecosystem of
land and ecosystem of water. In this lesson you will learn about ecosystem of
land and ecosystem of water.

Land ecosystem: Land ecosystem may be of different types. For
example- ecosystem of forest, ecosystem of desert, etc. The forest region of
Bangladesh may be mentioned as the example of forest ecosystem. The forest of
Bangladesh is divided into two main regions. (a) The forest of Sylhet and
Chittagong hill tracts and (b) The Sundarbans forest of coastal region of Khulna.
A brief description of the ecosystem of Sundarbans are given below-

The Sundarbans is a single large forest of Bangladesh. The vegetation of
Sunderbans is different from the vegetation of other forests. The Sundarbans 1s
situated in the southern region of Khulna district skirting the coastal belt of the
Bay of Bengal. In the ecosystem of the Sunderbans the soil is of high salt
density. As salinity increases coastward in the tidal and sub-tidal areas, there is a
transition of dense mangrove vegetation. The soil of the Sundarbans is very
muddy. So, it is not suitable for air passing. So the branch roots of the plants of
this region grow erect and spread along the upper layer of the soil imstead of
inward. Root tip of these plants bear numerous spores through which
atmospheric oxygen enters into the plant body for respiration. The sundari,
garan, gewa, kewra, golpata, etc. are the major plants of the forest. They are the
producers of the ecosystem. Insects, birds, deer, etc. are primary consumers,
156 Science

Jackals, tortoises, cranes elc. are secondary consumers. Tiger, hogs, etc. are
among the tertiary consumers. Among them hogs are omnivorous. The Royal
Bengal Tiger, chita, monkey, spotted deer, wild hogs, crocodiles, different types
of snakes, birds and insects are the major animals of the Sundarbans.

Aquatic ecosystem: Aquatic ecosystem is divided into three main types—
1. Ecosystem of ponds

2. Ecosystem of rivers

3. Marine ecosystem.

An ecosystem of a pond is described here
briefly for your understanding. A classic
example of an aquatic ecosystem is the ,
ecosystem of a small pond. In fact, a pond is an
ecologically independent and self-regulating |,
unit. In a pond there exist abiotic and biotic
components. The abiotic components are water, ~
dissolved oxygen, carbon dioxide and some
organic matters. Organisms can use these
elements directly. The elements that Constitute
the biotic components of a pond ecosystem are
producers, primary consumers,

secondary consumers, tertiary consumers and decomposers of different types. In
a pond ecosystem producers are minute floating or suspended small plants, known as
phytoplankton. Water lily (Shapla), Eichhomia etc. are among floating macrophytes.
Like minute floating plants, there are also some microscopic animals known as
zooplankton. Aquatic insects, small fish, mussels, snails etc. feed on producer and is
known as primary consumers. Medium sized fishes those live on eating the primary
consumers, are called secondary consumers. Again, big fish, stork etc. who eat
secondary consumers are tertiary consumers. Bacteria, fungi decompose dead
organisms. The decomposed substances are again used by the producer of the pond
ecosystem.

Lesson 6-7: Food chain and Food web

You know that living beings of an ecosystem cannot live alone. For survival,
they are interdependent in various ways. All the components surrounding the
living beings, influence the survival of organisms in different ways.

Food chain: Sunlight is the source of all energy of the earth. Green plants are
the producer of the ecosystem. You know primary consumer depends on
producer for food. Again, secondary consumer depends on primary consumers.
Tertiary consumers live on eating secondary consumers. In this way, all
organisms (both plants and animals) of an ecosystem, are interconnected

2025
2025

Environment and Ecosystem 157

serially. Consequently, there develops a food chain. The transfer of food energy
from producers through a series of food levels i.e. herbivores (primary
consumers) to carnivores, carnivores (secondary and tertiary consumers) to
decomposers in the ecosystem is called food chain. Thus, the food chain is a
feeding relationship in which a carnivore eats a herbivore which eats plants.

For example : Grass —+ insect —4 frog —+ snake —> eagle.

Food web: You must observe there are numerous food chains in an ecosystem.
Food chain does not work in isolation. Rather most food chams connect other
chains. Food chains are linked together to form a food web. Naturally in any
ecosystem more than one food chain remain attached to each other and this
complex food chain of more than one is known as food web.

Fig. 14.2: Fong web
Lesson 8-9 : Energy flow in the ecosystem

You know all organisms living on earth are dependent on solar energy (sunlight).
So, the sun is the main source of energy for the living world. Green plants trap
only 2% of the total energy reached on earth and produce carbohydrate food
through photosynthesis. Green plants through photosynthesis process convert
solar energy to chernical energy, naturally. During this process, green plants use
natural compounds like-water, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, iron, sulphur, etc. By
this process, a bridge between living and non-living world is established.

Energy uged in espiration

4 (Heat energy) i
ie

+e] —- [iio

[Beeman |

Energy dyed in respiration.
(heat)

Fig. 14.3 | Lingar flow of energy and cyche movement of matters in the ecosystem.
158 Science

The green plants receive the solar energy and transform it into chemical energy
and initiates food chain. The flow of energy in the ecosystem takes place in this
food chain. The energy content at successive trophic levels, from producers to
tertiary consumers, gradually decreases. So, it is evident that energy flows from
producers to herbivores; herbivores to secondary consumers and from
secondary consumers to tertiary consumers. This is how the energy flows. When
decomposers act on dead bodies or on garbage, different non-living nutritive
substances of ecosystem are produced. The green plants again consume them. It
is understood from the fact that, nutritive substances show circular movement
and the flow of energy is linear,

Lesson 10: Role of ecosystem in maintaining balance of nature

Ecosystem is a self-sufficient and self-regulating unit. The living organisms
depend on one another. One living being binds another in the food chain. One
living organism cannot get increased in number,nor can it become extinct easily.
Consequently, the number of living organisms at different trophic levels remains
more or less constant. Different changes may occur in nature, still the balance of
nature is maintained for longtime. Let us try to understand the matter with an
example. Suppose, there lives tigers, deer and hogs in a forest. Tigers eat deer
and hogs as their food. If due to any reason the number of deer and hogs get
increased in nature, the number of tigers will increase. The reason is, tigers get
enough food. Again, if the number of tigers get increased, the number of deer and
hogs will be decreased. Thus, the number of tigers will be decreased due to
inadequate food supply. Further, if the number of tigers is decreased, the number
of deer and hogs will be increased. From the example it 1s clear that the number
of increased organisms (tiger) will be reduced soon and it returns to the previous
condition. In this way, natural balance of an ecosystem is maintained naturally.
Task: To prepare a report about the role of ecosystem in maintaining natural
balance group. Prepare an example in your notebook for a particular environment

regarding how ecosystem maintains the balance of nature. Present it in front of your
class.

New words : Ecosystem, food chain, food web, phytoplankton, zoo plankton.

What we have learned at the end of this chapter-
- The interrelationship, action-reaction and interdependence between biotic

and abiotic components of a particular environment constitute an ecosystem.

- Ecosystem consists of two main components, namely, biotic and abiotic
components.

-  S§Starting from plant source the transfer of energy by eating and being eaten up
by different animals, is known as food chain.

- Innature, most food chains connect other chains. This complex food chain of
more than one is known as food web,

2025
2025

Environment and Ecosystem 159

Exercise
Fill in the blanks

1. The animals which are primary consumers.

2. Non-living components of an ecosystem are known as components.

3. In nature, living organisms are interrelated with one another
by different.
4. Due to action-reaction between biotic and abiotic components in

nature _______. remain active.

Short Answers Questions
1. Describe pond ecosystem with as a figure.
2. Discuss how nature maintains environmental balance.

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Which one of the following is primary consumer?
a. Phytoplankton b. Snail
c. Tiger d. Stork

2. Which one of the following food chain is correct?
a. Phytoplankton ——> Small fish ———-+ Zooplankton

b. Fruit + Insect ——*+__— Bird.
c. Grass —> Tortois —— Small Fish
d. Khudepana ——-+ Fish ——» = Snail.

Based on the following chart answer questions no. 3 and 4
Ecosystem
X (abiotic components) Y (biotic components)

|

a (producers) b (consumers) c (decomposer)

160 Science

3. Which one of the following is included under c?

a. Phytoplankton b. Zooplankton
c. Bacteria d. Insects

4. Inthe above chart-
i. Y is dependent on X
ii. 'b' is dependent on ‘a’
iii. ‘a’ and 'c’ are interdependent.
Which one of the following is correct?
a i&u b. iki
c. tt & iil d. i, ii & iii
Creative Questions
1. Fahim during his visit to a forest saw different types of plants and varieties of
animals. They include rabbit, deer, monkey, tiger hogs, etc. During his visit he

witnessed the felling of large trees in an area and the low presence of those
animals there.

a. What is ecosystem?

b. What do you mean by decomposer?

c. Make a food chain with the above mentioned animals that Fahim
witnessed and explain.

d. Explain causes of decline of the number of animals in the area where
felling of trees take place.

aa Respiration Respiraiion, Reupiretion «= Reupinetivn «= Reupiractan,
Fa i i i i
Lo) Giasa. [7*] Grasahoper *) Frog = [*) Sate «= [Bale
|

a. Whatis a biotic component?

b. What do you mean by food web?

c. Explain the flow of energy in the above mentioned food chain?

d. What would be the nutrient cycle of the above mentioned stem? Analyse.
Project: Observe a couple of food chains of the environment. After observation,

make a food web in a poster paper with the help of these food chains
and show it to the classroom.

ek END ***

2025
