2025

Chapter Four
Reproduction in Plants

If you observe you will see a great deal of seeds is produced from a plant. From
these seeds more new plants are produced. Besides, many plants are produced
from different parts of plant. These all are examples of reproduction of plants.

At the end of this chapter we will be able to-

differentiate between sexual and asexual reproduction ;
differentiate between different pollinations;
identify self pollmation and cross pollination in environment and explain the
reason behind it;
e explain pollinations;
explain the process of fertilization ;
e demonstrate germination through experiment.

Lesson 1-3 ; Reproduction

Every organism of the world tends to keep its descendants before it dies. This is
a natural phenomenon. The complex process by which an organism produces its
offsprings is known as reproduction. It is of two categories. One is sexual
reproduction while another is called asexual reproduction.

Asexual reproduction

Asexual reproduction is a mode of reproduction by which offspring arise from a
single parent, and inherit the genes of that parent only; it is reproduction which
does not involve meoisis, fertilization. The offspring will be exact genetic copies
of the parent. Asexual reproduction is mostly found in lower graded living
beings. Asexual reproduction is of two types; for example, spore production and
vegetative reproduction.
36

(a)

(b)

(a)

Science

Formation of spores: The tendency of asexual reproduction by spore
production is found mainly in lower graded plants. The modified somatic
cells of the plant body produce organs which contains spores. These are
known as spore case (sac) or sporangium. A fully formed sporangium
generally bears numerous spores. But sometimes sporangium bears a single
spore. Spore may develop outside the sporangium. These are known as
exospores. Some exospores are known as conidium. Mucor reproduces
asexually by forming enormous numbers of microscopic spores inside
sporangium. Penicillium reproduces by formation of conidia.

Vegetative reproduction: Asexual reproduction takes place by vegetative
structure i.e. without formation of spore or gamete. This type of reproduction is
known as vegetative reproduction. In that case any organ may be modified or
the fragmentation of any portion of the body may occur. When the vegetative
reproduction occurs in natural way or spontaneously, it is called natural
vegetative reproduction. When it occurs artificially, then it is called artificial
vegetative reproduction.

Natural Vegetative reproduction: Vegetative reproduction that takes place
naturally by different methods.

Segmentation: Generally this type of reproduction is scen in lower plants.
For example, if fragmented each part of Spirogyra, Mucor etc. grows into a
new plant and live independently.

Through root: Some plants are grown from the roots. Example- Segun
(tick), Patol, etc. Some roots are fat and juicy. Buds are grown on the surface
and from these buds new plant grows. Example-Sweet potato.

Modified stem: You must know which part of the plant body is known as
stem, In some cases stems are modified, Some of these modified stems have
no resemblance with true stem for their appearance and positions. This
modification occurs in order to protect from adverse condition, to ensure
storage of food or for vegetative reproduction. These modifications are
given below-

Tuber: Stem tubers are formed by outgrowths from
the lowest axillary buds which turn downwards into | Task: Show how
the soil. Eventually the tip of the underground stem
fills with starch and swells rapidly to form a tuber. ;
Tubers are distinguished by miele origin and the epichion aire eee
presence on their surfaces of scale leaves and axillary | ' potato and
buds, which form the eyes. From each eye an | S'ser.

individual plant grows. For example- Potato.

vegetative repro-

2025
2025

Reproduction in Plants a7

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Rhizome: Rhizome lies inside the soil parallel of land. Like stem it bears distinct
node and internode. lternode bears scale leaves and auxilary buds. They
become fattining and juicy by storing food. In favourable condition these
buds grows into individual plants. For example-Ginger.

Bulb : These are very small stems. New plants grow on their axillary and
terminal buds. Example-Onion, Garlic etc.

Stolon: You may have seen arum stolon. These are branches from arum
(kochu) and modified for reproduction. Stolon produces buds at the
terminal end and thus helps in reproduction. Example-Arum, Minit
(pudina).

Offset: Water hyacinth, Spiredela etc. form a very short runner called an
offset. Runners grow out horizontally from axillary buds forming several
new plants. After some days the daughter plants are detached from mother
plants and grow individually. Example- Water hayacinth.

Bulbil: The improper development of auxilary buds of some plants forms
round-shaped structure called bulbil. After sometimes, bulbil is separated
from the plant and drops on soil and finally produces new plants.
Example-Yam.

From leaves: From a grounded leaf of a Bryophyllum numerous young
bryophyllum grows. Example-Stone-chips (Bryophyllum). All the process
of vegetative reproduction cited above occurs naturally. The daughter plant
that grows from vegetative reproduction has the same characteristics as the
parent. So, no new character appears. So, for production of better quality
cash crops, artificial vegetative propagation method is used,

Artificial vegetative reproduction: You have seen the grafting of good variety
of mango, orange, lemon, guava etc. Can you say why we do = grafting? Plants
produced from seeds sometimes show less productivity and inferior quality. In
these plants artificial vegetative propagation is a useful fool to restore the
parental quality. Let us know about artificial vegetative propagation.

1.

Grafting: The process by which a straight, young and fresh stem develops
root and thus enables the stem to live individually is known as grafting. A
cut is made in the bark of the stem, where roots to be developed. Now the
cut is to be covered by soil and cow dung, and finally with the help of
cellophene tape or polythene to protect the fall off soil and cow dung. This
part of the stem should be kept moist by regular watering. If kept in this
condition, root will grow in a couple of days. The stem with root, separated
from mother plant, grows into new plant after planting.

Cutting: You have observed that stem cuttings of rose if put into moist soil
grows new leaves after a few days. Each stem of this kind grows into a new
rose tree.

Task: Take arose stem and show how stem grafting or cutting is made.

38 Science

Lesson 4 : Sexual reproduction

Fruit grows from flower and seed trom fruits. Seed gives rise to the next
generation. A flowering plant produces offsprings throguh sexual reproduction.
So, flower is an important organ of plant.

Flower : There are many flowers blooming near your school and house. First
you take some flowers among it and observe carefully. Have you seen total five
parts in every flower? The parts are receptacle, calyx, petal, stamen
(androecium) and carpel (gynoectum). If you get all those parts then the flowers
are known as typical flower or complete flower and you do not get one or two
parts then the flowers are known as incomplete flower. Some flowers may have
extra parts under the calyx, such as chaina rose (joba). This extra parts is called
epi-calyx.

Some flowers may or may not have stalks
(pedicel). Flower with stalk is known as
stalked and without stalk is known as
unstalked flower.

Fig. 4.1; Different parts of a typical flower

Different parts of a flower

Sepals: In many flowers there is an outermost whorl (ring) of sepals, known
collectively as the calyx. Sepals are usually green and look like small leaves.
Sepals may be segmented or joined. They enclose and protect the central region
of the flower (from sunlight, rains and insects) when it is in its budding stage.

Petals: In most of the flowers the reproductive organs are surrounded by a whorl
of petals. Petals are known collectively as the corolla of the flower. Petals may
be joined as in datura or may remain separated, eg, china rose. Some flowers
have different coloured and scented petals. Petals of this type attract insects
which come to collect the nectar and by doing so transfer pollens from flowers
to flowers. This is the second whorl of the flower.

Stamens: Surrounding the gynoecium is a whorl of stamens. Stamens are
known collectively as androecium. These are the male reproductive organs. A
stamen consists of a stalk (filament) bearing an anther. Each anther is made up
of four pollen sacs in which pollen grains are formed. Pollen grains contain the
male gametes. They take part in reproduction directly. This is the third whorl of
the flower.

2025
=
S
wy

Reproduction in Plants 39

Carpels: The gynoecium is at the centre of a flower. A
gynoecium may be structured with one or more carpels. | Task: Collect a china rose
When a gynoecium is formed with many more carpels oe a oun
which are completely merged with each other, then it is | poy them to the class.

called, syncarpous and when they are separated, it is
called polycarpous. The gynoecium is typically made up of an ovary, style and
stigma as in the centre of flower. One or more ovules are in a flower, arranged
inside the ovary. Within the ovule, the female reproductive cell ovum is
produced. This ovum, like an androecium, is directly involved in the process of

reproduction.

Sepal and petals are known as the accessory whorl while the stamens and carpels
are known as the essential whorl of a flower.

Thalamuth and the Flower-sheet: This section holds all the above tuft.

Inflorescence

You all have seen inflorescence. The mode of arrangement of flowers on the
floral axis is known as inflorescence. The inflorescence is of two types. For
example-

( a) Recemose-The growth of the floral axis is unlimited.

(b) Cymose-The growth of the floral axis is limited,

Inflorescence is very important for pollination.

Lesson 5-6: Pollination

Pollination is also known as pollen transfer. Pollination is the precondition of
fruit and seed production. Rub your finger on the stamens of androecium of a
flower and observe. A kind of yellow or orange coloured powder must stick to
your finger. These powders are pollen or pollen grains.

Pollination is the transfer of pollen grains from anthers to stigmas. Pollination is
of two types-self pollination and cross pollination.

Self pollination: Self pollination is the

transfer of pollens from anthers to stigmas in ee
the same flower or between flowers on the We Sw Bh al e SG
same plant. Example- Mustard, Pumpkin, yer sin . aA ey

datura etc. > LS
A * is : F EN sil Ig ee re

Cross pollination: Cross pollination is the ““) We Vl

transfer of pollens from one plant to the i Pie

stigmas on another plant of the same species.
Shimul, Papaya etc. show cross pollination.

Fig. 4.2: Self pullinution and crese-pouination
40 Science

Agents for pollination: In most cases the transfer of pollen occurs through an
agent. The carrier that carries pollen up to stigmas is known as agents for
pollination.

Wind, water, insects, birds, snails as well as man also act as agents of pollination.
Insects and birds fly from flowers to flowers in search of nectar or in attraction
of ther brilliant colours. During this act pollen grains get stuck to the body of the
carrier. As insects and birds do this, they transfer pollen from one flower to
another unknowingly.

To get the help of pollinating media some structural modifications are seen in
flowers. These modifications are known as adaptation. The adaptations are
different for various pollimating media. The adaptations are as follows-

Adaptation of insect-pollinated flowers: Flowers, large, brightly coloured and
scented petals with nectars. Pollen graims and stigmas are sticky.
Example- China rose, Pumpkin, Mustard etc.

Adaptation of wind-pollinated flowers: These flowers do not have scent,
nectar or coloured petals. They are small. Stigmas are sticky, branched and
sometimes feathery. Anthers are on long stalks. For example-Paddy.

Adaptation of water-pollinated flowers: Flowers are small, light-weight and
can float in water. These flowers do not have scent. Female flowers have long
stalks whereas male flowers are with short stalks. Matured male flowers get
detached from stalks and float on water.

Adaptation of animal-pollination flowers: These flowers are moderately
large. If small they arranged in inflorescence. Brightly coloured, may have scent
or not. Example- kadom, shimul, arum ete.

Lesson 7 and 8 : Fertilization and fruit formation

Formation of gamete is the precondition of fertilization. The sexual union of the
motile and small male gamete with the comparatively bigger, non - motile
female gamete is known as fertilization.

Ovule

Eola grain Antipodal cell
Ernbryty tae:
Pollen tube —— Secondhiry nucleas (2n)
g | Ovuly — Male gaineta
a ate
, a Ovary hale gamete (nik
i i « 1
{ h———Antipodal cell —— Synergid cell
—Secandary ancieus (2m) i
‘ Be (a) arate
——— Synargid call
ss "Wake gemnete (1a)

Fig. 4.3: The process of fertilization

2025
Reproduction in Plants al

Pollen grains are transferred to the stigma by pollination. The stigma produces a
sticky fluid which nourishes the pollen grains and stimulates each other to burst
open and develop a long, hollow, tubular outgrowth known as pollen tube. This
tube pushes its way between cells of the style and grows towards the ovule and
finally reaches the embryo sac.

By this time, two male gametes are formed inside the pollen tube. The apex of
the pollen tube ruptures (bursts open) releasing male gametes. Ovule contains
embryo sac. Female gamete or ovum develops inside embryo sac. One of the two
male gametes discharged from the pollen tube unites and fertilizes the egg. The
other male nucleus (gamete) unites and fuses with secondary diploid nucleus and
develops into cereal grains.

Formation of fruits: Mango, Jackfruit, Litchi, Banana, Grape, Apple, Guava,
Safeda etc. are considered as fruits. These fruits may be eaten without cooking.
Vegetables like Gourd, Pumpkin, Ribbed gourd (jhinga), Palwal (patol) etc. that
we eat after cooking are also fruits. In fact these all are fruits. The process of
erowing these fruits start by the transformation of ovaries of gynoecium of
flower. The transformation occurs in the ovary after pollination and fertilization.
The ovules transform into seeds. After fertilization, the ovary alone or in
combination with other floral parts turns into fruits.

When only the ovary tums into fruit, it is known as true fruit, eg, Mango,
Jackfruit ete. When the fruits are developed from different floral parts other than
the ovary, they are called false fruit, eg, Apple, Dellenia (chalta) etc. All (both
true and false) fruits are divided into three main classes on the basis of their
origin and nature. These are - simple fruit, aggregate fruit and multiple fruit.

(1) Simple fruit: When the ovary of a single carpel or more than one united
carpels of a flower develop into a fruit, it is known as simple fruit, eg,
Mango. Depending on the nature of pericarp, simple fruits are again divided
into two groups- dry fruits and fleshy fruits.

Dry fruits: Fruits having thin and dehiscent pericarps when they are ripe,
are known as dry fruits. Example- Bean, Lady's finger, Mustard etc.

Fleshy fruits: Fruits with thick and succulent pericarps are known as fleshy
fruits. The pericarp of fleshy fruit does not split open when it ripens.
Example- Mango, Black berry, Banana etc.

Forma-6- Science, Class-8
42 Science,

Fig. 4.4: Simple fruit Fig. 4.5: Aggregate fruit Fig. 4.6: Multiple fruit

Aggregate fruit: When the fruit develops from the merger of several
ovaries with many [ree carpels of a flower, it is known as aggregate [rutt.
The number of fruitlets formed corresponds with the number of carpels
present in the gynoecium of the flower. A cluster of fruitlets is produced at
a time and placed on a single stalk. For example -Custard apple, Champa,
Nayantara, Akanda etc.

Multiple fruit: When all the flowers of an inflorescence together form a
frit, it is known as multiple fruit. Examples of such fruits are- Pineapple,
Jackfruit etc.

Task: Collect some fruits and write down their types in your notebook.

Lesson 9 - 10: Structure of seeds and its germination

Structure of seeds: Place a filter paper inside a bowl and soak it with water and
then put 8-10 wet gram seeds on it and keep it covered for 3-4 days. They will
germinate. There 1s a small pore, called micropile, near the pointed part ( end) of
the seed. Radicle comes out through it. Seed at this stage may be pelled off by
slight pressing of the finger tips. Felled off seed is yellow in colour. Two
cotyledon of the seed will be open if further pressure is applied to it. At the
junction of two cotyledon there is a white coloured structure, known as
embryonal axis.

Seed Coat

Fig. 4.7: Different parts of a pram seed.

2025
2025

Reproduction in Plants _
The area of embryonal axis which is attached to the cotyledons is known as
nodal zone. The part of embryonal axis above the nodal zone is called epicotyle
and the part below the nodal zone is known as hypocotyle. The upper apex of the
embryonal axis is known as plumule while the lower end of embryonal axis is
called radicle. Radicle, plumule and cotyledon are collectively known as embryo
and their outer covering is called seed coat. Seed coat consists of two layers,
such as-

Outer layer: The outermost layer of seed coat is hard and thick, It is known as
testa.

Inner layer: The innermost thin layer of seed coat is known as tegmen.

Task: Show different parts of a pea seed through an experiment.

Germination: The development of a seedling from a seed is called germination.
In order to germinate, seed requires water, warmth and air. The germination in
which the epicotyle grows up rapidly and as a result, the plumule comes out of
the soil leaving the cotyledons underground, is known as hypogeal germination.
This type of germination takes place in gram, paddy, mango etc. Sometimes
plumule with colyledons come out of the soil, it is called epigeal germination.
Tamarind, Castor, Pumpkin etc. shows this type of germination.

Fig. 4.8: Hypogeal germination Fig. 4.9: Epigeal germination

Germination of gram seed: Here hypogeal germination takes place. In this type
of germination plumule comes out of the soil leaving the cotyledons
underground. Excess growth of epicotyle is responsible for this. Gram is a
non-endospermic dicot seed. After sowing gram seeds and soil is supplied with
required quantity of water, temperature and air, they germinate and come out of
the soil in 3-4 days. Firstly, the seeds swell up by absorbing water and radicle
comes out through micropile. Gradually, it develops into tap root. In second step
plumule comes out of the soil. In this case the two cotyledons remain under the
soil. Initially, embryo gets nourished by the food stored in the cotyledons.
4 Science

New words : Asexual and sexual reproduction, spore, tuber, rhizome, bulb,
bulbil, hypocotyle, epicotyle, tegmen
What we have learned at the end of this chapter

- Reproduction is mainly of two types, for example, asexual and sexual.

- Flower is the reproductive organ of higher plants.

- An ideal flower has five parts.

- Fruit is mainly of three types, eg, simple, aggregate and multiple.

- Germination is of two types. For example, hypogeal and epigeal.

Exercise
Fill in the blanks
1. Reproduction is mainly of two types, and
2. When fruit develops from single ovary, the fruit is called
3. The flower which bears part, is known as complete flower.
4. Pollination is of two types and
5 When all the flowers of an inflorescence together form a fruit, itis known

as fruit.

6. Ovule of the matured fruit develops into

Short Answer Questions

1. Why asexual reproduction is important for plants?
2. Why grafting is made from mango tree?

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Which one of the following is aggregate fruit?
a. Mango b. Custard apple
c. Jackfruit d. Pineapple

2025
2025

Reproduction in Plants

La |

a. They are colourless
c. They are very light

45

2. Which one is the characteristic of insect- pollinated flowers?

b. They are scentless

d, The are colourful and bears
nectargland.

From the figure below answer questions no. 3 and 4

3. Which part receives pollen grains?
a. m
cc.

4. p part of the figure-
i. develops into fruit
11. develops into seed
iii. helps in reproduction.

Which one of the following is correct?
a i&il

c. ti& itt
Creative Questions
1.
M N

a. What is reproduction?

b. What do you mean by pollination?

b 0
d. p
b i& ii
cd. i, ii & tii
oO P
46 Science

c, Draw a labelled diagram of the longitudinal section of the plant part constituted
by M,N, © and P parts.

d. OfM, O and P, which two parts are more essential for plant reproduction? Give
reasons in favour of you answer.

2

a. What is vegetative reproduction?

b. What do you mean by germination?

c. Explain pollination between P and Q flower.

d. Which pollination of the two figures play role in creating new
characteristics? Give your comments after having a comparative analysis.

Do yourself

1. Collect gourd, pumpkin, datura, brinjal, kolke flower, china rose and bean

flower and examine which of these flowers have five parts.
2. Take a tamarind seed and examine its germination. Note down the

changes.

2025
