Chapter Eleven
Light

When a ray of light crosses obliquely from one transparent medium into another
transparent medium, it is bent at the interface, This is refraction of light. In this
chapter we will discuss various day to day phenomena where refraction of light
is involved. These will include the total internal reflection and its application in
the use of optical fibres. We will also discuss how a magnifying glass works and
compare the function of our eyes with the function of a camera.

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-

e discuss different phenomenon of refraction in daily life by drawing
diagrams;

explain total internal reflection ;

explain how optical fibers work;

explain the function of magnifying glass ;

explain how spectacles work;

explain the functions of camera and our eyes;
®@ appreciate the usefulness of light in performing the different activities in daily life.

Lesson 1: The refraction of light

Have you seen your image in a window glass? You must have marked that your
image in the window glass is rather indistinct. Do you find a difference between
this image and the image you see in the mirror?Why the image in the window
glass is dull? The reason is that glass is transparent and most of the light falling
on it passes through. Only a small fraction of the incident light is reflected back
which forms the dull image.

Let us now see in detail how the direction of light changes when passes from one
medium into another. First of all we begin with the following activity:

2025
2025

Light 115

Activity: The concept of refraction

Necessary components: A long pencil, a drinking glass

with water in it

Methodology: Take a glass which is 3/4 filled with water.

You now put the pencil in the partially filled glass of water L
in an inclined way like the figure 11.1. How does the part

of the pencil look under the water?

Observe the immersed part of the pencil. Write down the
observed results. We know that we can see an object only
when light reaches our eyes reflected from the object. You
surely have seen that apparently the immersed part of the pencil — Fig. 11.1 ; Refraction of light
look shorter, thicker and broken along the bottom of the glass.

In the above experiment light from the bottom of the immersed part of the pencil
reaches us after refraction. Before the light from the immersed part of the pencil
reaches our eye it passes from the denser transparent medium water to rarer
medium air and is deflected in the surface. If light passes straight through two
different medias, the pencil will look straight certainly. But you observed that it
seemed broken under water. The apparent bending of the pencil gives evidence
that light is refracted at the surface between the two different Medias. This
change of direction of ight is known as refraction of light. Light follows a
straight path when the mectum is fixed and transparent. But light change its
direction as soon as it enters into another medium. This change will take place
according to the density of the changes medium. It is to be noted that if light falls
normally on the surface, there will be no change of direction of hght.

Lesson 2-3: Laws of refraction of light
Light rays follow the laws of refraction. Do the following experiment first?

Activity: Refraction of light of a glass slab.

Necessary components: Pins, glass slab, drawing board a N
Methodology: Fix a sheet of white paper om the drawing FD
board. Pui the glass slab at the cenier of the white paper and
draw its boundary line. Now remove the glass slab and draw and
incident ray AB. Fix two pins P and Q approximately 5 cm
apart on the line AB. Put back the glass slab in the previous
position and try to look at the pins P and Q from the opposite ak on
side of the slab. (Teachers help may be needed). Now put two
pins R and S on the opposite side in such a way that if you
look from this side all the pins PORS appear to be in a
straight line through the slab, Rernove the slab and draw the

Fig. 11.2 : Refraction of light
with respect to glass slab,

116 Science

line CD through the points marked by the pins R and 5. Draw the refracted ray BC, the
normals MM” and NN“ as in the figure. Using a protractor draw the incident angle ABN. the
refracting angle CBN’ , and the emergent angle DCM.

From the above experiment what observations R
can you make? Here light is entering from

rarer medium air to the denser medium glass. ok,

From the measurement of angles it is observed

that the angle of incidence i is greater than the f

angle of refraction r and is equal to the / 7
emerging angle e. What conclusions can you Fig.11.3: Refraction of light from
draw fron these? dense medium to racer medium.

@® When a ray of light enters from rarer medium to a denser medium then it
bends towards the normal. In this case the angle of incidence is greater than
the angle of refraction.

e@ When the light ray is reflected from one medium (like air) into another
medium (like glass) and finally emerge out in the original medium angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of emergence.

® The incident ray, the refracted ray and the normal drawn at the incident point
on the surface separating the two media, all lie in the same plane.

® Jn addition to this it is observed from the above experiment that light rays in
passing from denser medium to rarer medium bends away from the normal.
In this case the angle of incidence is smaller than the angle of refraction.

e@ When the ray of light is mcident along the normal, then the angle of
incidence, the angle of refraction and the angle of emergence are all zero. In
this case there is no change in direction of the incident ray.

Lesson 4-5: Practical application of refraction
You will find the application of refraction in the following cases

1) When a straight rod is immerged obliquely in water and
looked at from above, how the part of the rod that is under
water will appear? If you observe carefully you will see
that the rod is appearing smaller, thicker and raised
upwards. In fact it appears so because of refraction. As
you see in the figure, light is refracted from the denser
medium water into the rarer medium air and enters your
eyes. Every part of the emerged rod is raised upwards. As
a result the rod appears lifted upwards and reduced in
lengths and increased in diameter.

Fig-11.4: Refraction of light

2025
2025

Light N17

2) Take a steel mug or a ceramic cup. Put a coin in the mug or ay
in the cup. Keep your eyes in such a position that you just
fail to see the coin. If now somebody pours water in the cup,
the coin will be come visible at one stage. It has been
possible due to refraction phenomenon. Due to refraction
light bends in passing from the denser medium water into 5.115 viruaiimege ofa
rarer medium air and create a virtual image of the coin — svisdoetoretmtanof light
which you see.

(3) Did you ever hunt fishes? Does a fish stay at the position
at which you see the fish in transparent water? Not at all. In
fact, we observe the virtual image of the fish. The fish stays at
a position which a bit lower than where it appears to be. Ifyou
hunt the fish with a spear, you have to aim it at a deeper and
farther position than its apparent position. Something similar

Fig.1 16: Change of 4
happens about the appearance of steps under transparent —‘“fositun or tshes due”

water. The real position of a step under water is lower than it = ***Hor of hght
appears when we look obliquely.

People failing to realize it, may have a fall. Such events you can see if you visit
the Sera Island of saint martin, The water there is very transparent. Stones and
algae under water appear much closer to the eye than they really are. This
happens due to refraction of light.

Lesson 6-7: Total internal reflection and critical angle

When a ray of light eniers a rarer medium from a denser medium, the refracted
ray bends away from the normal drawn at the point of incidence of the ray. As a
result the angle of refraction becomes larger than the angle of meidence. In this
way as the angle of incidence increases the corresponding angle of refraction
increases. For a

particular combination of such pair of media there is a
particular value of the angle of incidence, which in this
case must be smaller than 90°, the corresponding angle
of refraction becomes 90° which means the refracting
ray passes along the surface of separation of the two
media. The angle of incidence which corresponds to this
situation is called the critical angle. Now, what will
happen if the angle of incidence is greater than the
critical angle? The angle of refraction can not naturally and critical angle
be greater than 90°.

Lp ll pllyl

118 Science

It has been observed experimentally that in this case the light ray instead of
being refracted is reflected back in the medium from the surface level. Thus the
boundary surlace here acts as a reflecting surface and this reflection occurs
according to the laws of ordinary reflection. This phenomenon is called total
internal refection. This means that the light ray from denser medium in this case
is reflected at the boundary surface following the ordinary law of reflection and
returns back totally to the denser medium.

According to the figure the angle of incidence corresponding to the incident ray
PO is less than the critical angle and the corresponding reflected ray is OP’ For
the incident ray QO the angle of incidence is equal to the critical angle, and the
corresponding reflected ray is QO” which is traveling along the boundary
surface. This means the corresponding angle of refraction is 90°. For the ray RO,
the angle of incidence is greater than the critical angle. In the case the ray OR ‘is
reflected back by the total internal reflection. Now the question is what
difference is there between ordinary reflection and total internal reflection?

In the case of ordinary reflection there is always some partial refraction along
with the reflection. But in the total reflection it is observed that the incident ray
is totally reflected.

The conditions for total internal reflection

1) Tt occurs only when the light ray goes from a denser medium to a rarer
medium.

2) The angle of incidence in the denser medium must be greater than the
critical angle corresponding to the pair of media chosen.

Lesson 8: Optical fibre and magnifying glass
Optical fibre

The optical fibre is a very thin fibre of glass. It is even thinner than human hair
and is flexible and extremely transparent. It is used as the carrier of the light rays.
When light rays enter in this fibre, they undergo repeated total internal reflection
at the walls of the fibre. This process continues till the rays reach the other end
of the fibre. Usually doctors use a bundle of optical fibres in a flexible tube
through which light rays are guided to examine different internal parts of the
human body like the stomach or colon. Another use of optical fibre is optical
communication. Since light consists of high frequency electro-magnetic waves,
it can carry much more information. In optical fibre the loss of signal strength is
very low and one can send information to long distances and along curved paths
by using it.

2025
2025

Light 119

Magnifying glass

A magnifying glass is a type of convex lens that makes objects appear
larger. When an object is placed within a certain distance of a convex lens
and viewed from the opposite side, an upright, magnified, and virtual
image of the object is seen. The closer this i image
is formed to the eye, the larger the eye’s viewing
angle will be, making the image appear larger.
However, if the image is formed closer than a point
known as the “near point” (the closest distance at
which the eye can see clearly), it will no longer
appear sharp. When the image forms at this near
point, it becomes most clearly visible to the naked
eye.

When a beam of light parallel to the lens’s axis Fis!!-8 -Magnitymg glass
strikes a convex lens, the point where the light rays converge is called the
focal point. The distance from this focal point to the lens along its axis is
known as the focal length. To magnify objects or text that are hard to see
with the naked eye, a convex lens with a short focal length is used. This
lens, enclosed in a suitable frame, is known as a magnifying glass, reading
glass, or simple microscope. This device doesn’t offer a high degree of
magnification.

With the teacher's guidance, you can observe this type of magnifying glass.

Lesson 9-10: Human eye

The eye is one of our five sense organs. We see things by our eyes. The working
of the human eye is similar to the working of a camera. The special parts of a
human eye are shown in the picture. It's main parts are desenbed below.

a) Eye-ball: In the cavity of the eye there is a spherical object which can be rotated

within a certain limit. This is known ag eye ball.

b) Selera: This is a white covering of the eye-ball which 1s hard, fibrous and opaque.

It protects the eye from external harmful effects and preserves the shape of the eye.

ce) Cornea: Frontal part of the sclera is called cornea.
This part of the sclera is transparent and is bulged m4
outwards more than other parts. Come ‘7 FRuna

d) Choroid: It is a black membrane covering the inner pees abi
body of sclera. Because of its blackness, the light t= “ ——
entering the eye is not reflected. Fig i

of Human eye

e) Irish: It is an opaque membrane which stays just
behind the comea. This membrane can be of
different colour like blue, deep brown, black etc.
for different persons.
120 Science

f) Pupil: It is a circular hole at the centre of the cornea which is connected to
muscular cells. The size of the aperture of the pupil can be changed by the
expansion and shrinkage of the muscles attached to it.

g) Crystalline convex lens: This is a convex lens made of soft jelly like material
which is situated behind the cornea.

h) Retina: It is a light sensitive rose coloured translucent membrane located
behind the eye-ball. When light falls on retina it creates some excitements in
those nerves and produce the sensation of sight in the brain.

i) Aqueous hummour and vitreous hummour: The space between the lens
and the cornea is filled with some kind of transparent watery substance. This is
called aqueous hummour.

The space between the lens and the retina is filled with jelly like material. This
is called vitreous hummour. ;

Photographic camera

This instrument is used to take photographic
pictures on photographic plates with the help of
lenses. This is why it is called Photographic
Camera or in Short Camera. The different parts of
the camera are: 1) Camera Box, 2) Camera lens, |
3) Aperture, 4) Shutter, 5) Screen, 6) Photographic

pa I a
Plate, 7) Slide. Fig 1110: Photographic Camera

The working of a camera: Before taking the photograph of an object the
ground glass screen of the camera is directed to the Object PQ and the shutter is
opened. Now by adjusting distance between the lens and the screen the image Pq
of the object is focused on screen which is placed opposite to the object. The
proper brightness of the image is obtained by adjusting the aperture. Now
removing the ground glass screen the shutter is closed and the ground glass is
replaced by the photographic plate. Now, the cover of the slide is removed and
the photographic plate is exposed to a definite amount of light through the
shutter and aperture. After that the aperture is again closed. This controlling of
light is called the exposure. The incident light causes chemical reaction to the
silver halide grains contained in the emulsion of the photographic plate.

2025
Light 121

Now the slide is covered and the photographic plate is taken to the dark room,
and then the photographic plate is taken out from the slide and the plate or film
is kept immersed in a chemical solution called developer. The parts of the film
ate chemically reduced trom the silver halide to metallic silver, the reduction
takes place. Those parts of the object which emitted more light, the more
quantity of silver is stored to those parts of the plate, darkens the corresponding
parts of the film proportionately. The thickness of the coating of silver depends
on the brightess of light and duration of exposure. After washing the film it is
dipped in hypo (Sodium thiosulphite). As a result those parts of the film which
had not been exposed to light get their silver halide dissolved. The film is then
washed in water. Thus we get the negative picture of the photograph of the
object. To get the positive of the picture of the negative film it is placed over a
photographic paper coated with silver halide and exposed to the light for a short
time. After this the paper is washed in hypo as before and the positive picture is
obtained after washing and drying.

A comparison between an eye and a camera

Camera Eye

1) Tt is a light proof closed box which is 1) The eye behaves as a light proof
painted black inside. For this black enclosure. Its walls are black so light
colour light incident on it is not falling on it is not reflected,
iidaecleaes 2) With the help of the eve lid, the eye lens can

2) Using the shutter the lens of the camera be kept exposed to light but i lid cannot kept
can be kept exposed to light for any exposed to light for any length of time.
length of time.

3) The amount of light needed to form the | 3) Depending on the intensity of light the
picture can be controlled by adjusting aperture of the cornea is automatically
the circular aperture of the camera. adjusted to allow the necessary light to

form the image.

4) Acamera has many lenses and each lens hag a aa
specific focal length, The lens-use functioning | 4) By adjusting the muscles attached to the
focal length can be changed by moving the eye lens, its focal length can be changed

lens backward and forward. by changing ils curvature.
5) The image of the object is formed by its | 5) Cornea, aqueous humour eye-lens,
convergent lens. vitreous humour together make a

convergent lens, like system to form the

image of an object.

6) A real inverted and reduced image of the 6° An real inverted and reduced image of
object is formed on the photographic the object is formed on the light
plate. sensitive retina.

Forma-|6- Science, Class-8
122 Science

New words: Refraction of light, total internal reflection, critical angle
What we have learnt at the end of this chapter-

- Inacertain transparent medium light propagates in a straight line but it enters
a second medium of different it bends by an amount which depends on the
optical density of the second medium.

- When light falls perpendicularly and transparently on the surface separating
the two media, its direction does not change.

- When light enters from ararer medium into a denser medium it bends towards
the normal drawn at the point of incidence on the surface separating the

media. When light enters from the denser medium into a rarer medium it
bends away from the normal.

- For total internal reflection the angle of the incidence in the denser medium
must be greater than the critical angle that corresponds to the two media.

- There are many similarities between the working procedure of a human eye
and that of photography camera,
Exercise
Fill in the blanks
1. The path of light when it enters a different medium depends on
2. The ray of light that falls along the normal to the surface emerges

7

3. In total internal reflection, the angle of is greater than the
Short Answer Question

1. Why light changes direction when it enters in a different medium?
2. What is critical angle? When is it formed?
3. What are the differences between a human eye and a camera?

Multiple Choice Questions

1. What is the term used for the sclera in front of the eye?
a. Lens b. Retina
c. Cornea d. Iris

2, Optical fiber is used for -

i, fuel
li. examining stomach
iii. telecommunication

Which one of the following is correct? a
a 1&u b. i&in ce. ii & iii d. i, 11 & ii
2025

Light 123

Answer questions no. 3 and 4 from the following figure

OS
Sr OK SF

3. In which figures light is propagating from denser medium into rare medium?

ax FB b. Q
ce R d. §
4. In which of the figures the angle of incidence is equal to the refracting angle?
a. P&R b. Q&R
c. Q&S d. S&P

Creative Questions

l. One day Anis went to a pond to take a bath. He put his feet on the visible
steps under transparent water. But since the steps were at a greater depth than
they appeared to,he fell down. On the other hand his younger brother is
catching fish in the pond using spear failed to throw the spike correctly.
a. What is refraction of light?
b, What is the cause of change in the direction of light?

c. Explain why Anis fell in the pond ?

d

. What type of trick makes Anis’ brother successful in hunting the fish?
Explain your answer.

gityitys dy

a. What is total internal refracion?
b. What is meant by optical fiber?
c. Explain critical angle in the figure.

d. Explain the path of Ray RO with diagram.
