Chapter Two
Growth and Heredity of Living Organism

Body of all organisms consists of cell and all cells arise from the division of
existing cells. Unicellular organisms multiply by cell division. In this way one
cell divides into two, and two transforms into four. They divide further in the
same manner and this is how growth of living organism takes place.

The cells found in most multicellular organisms originate from the divisions of
a single cell. The life of a multicellular organism originates from the zygote-the
union or fertilization of an egg and a sperm. Cell division provides the basis for
one form of growth, for both sexual and asexual reproduction.

Pe

At the end of this chapter we will be able to —
« explain the types of cell divisions;

e explain the growth and development of living organism through cell division;
e explain what role cell division plays to restore genetic trait.

Lesson 1 : Types of cell division
In hving orgamsm three main types of cell divisions are found, such as,

(1) Amitosis (2) Mitosis and (3) Meiosis.

Amitosis: Amitosis cell division occurs in Bacteria, yeast, fungi and in amoeba.
Unicellular prokaryotes procreate through amitosis cell division. The nucleus
elongates and becomes dumb bell shaped and becomes slender in the middle and
gets separated from each other to form tow nuclei. At the same time the psytopalsm
also elongates in the middle to form tow cells. In this kind of cell division, the
nucleus of mother cell and psytopalsm get directly separated to form two cells.
Hence it is called direct cell division.

cytoplasm. Nucleus

Nucleus Famer
nucleus

Fig. 2.1: Amitosis (direct cell division).

2025
2025

Growth and Heredity of Living Organism 15

Mitosis : Somatic cells of higher plants and animals are divided in mitosis

cell division. The process of cell division by which nucleus and chromo-

somes of a eukaryotic cell gets divided only once is known as mitosis. In

this process the nucleus of the mother cell is divided only once and pro-

duces two daughter cells bearing similar characteristics and having same

size, quality and number of chromosomes. Mitosis ensures increase of

height and breadth of the body of animals and plants. The cells of the meri-

stematic (apex of branch and roots) tissue of plant increase their number by

mitotic division.

Meiosis : Meiotic cell division occurs during the formation of

reproductive cell from the reproductive mother cells. The characteristics

of meiotic cell division is that the nucleus is divided twice and

chromosomes divide once. As a result of cell division by meiosis the

number of chromosomes of the daughter cells becomes half of the number

of chromosomes of mother reproductive cells. In this process four new

cells are produced which contain half of the chromosomes of the mother

cell, hence called reduction division. Generally meiosis occurs in the

reproductive mother cell during the formation of gametes,

Mitosis

The features of mitosis

1. Mitotic cell division is the division of somatic cell.

2. In this process the nucleus of the mother cell is divided only once.

3. Mother cell is divided into two cells of same quality.

4. The number of chromosome of daughter nucleus and mother nucleus
remain identical after mitotic cell division.

5. In mitosis division, each chromosomes equally divided lengthwise
along the centromere. As a result the number of chromosomes of the

two new cells remain same as the number of chromosomes of the
mother cell. So, mitosis is also known as equational division.

Where mitosis occurs ?

Mitosis takes place in the somatic cells of all eukaryotic organisms. The
meristematic tissue of the growing part of the plant, viz, apex of stem and
roots, growing leaves, buds etc. show this type of cell division. Mitosis
occurs in somatic cells of the animal body, developing embryo and during
asexual reproduction of lower animals and plants.
16 Science

Fig. 2.2: Cell division in root tip and shoot tip.

In which cells mitosis does not occur?
In case of animals the nerve cells (neuron) of the nervous tissue, matured red blood corpuscles (RBC) and
platelets of mammals and the cells of permanent tissue of plants does aot show mutosis cell division.

Lesson 2 : The process of mitosis cell division

The process of mitosis takes place in two phases. The nucleus divides in first
phase and cytoplasm in the second phase. The division of nucleus is known as
caryokinesis and the division of cytoplasm is cytokinesis. Mitosis is a
continuous process in which caryokinesis ( division of nucleus) occurs first and
then cytokinesis (division of cytoplasm) takes place. Before starting
caryokinesis and cytokinesis the nucleus of the dividing cell need to take some
preparations. This intermediary stage between the two consecutive cell divisions
is known as interphase or resting stage.

Division of nucleus or caryokinesis

The nucleus of the dividing cell passes through a continuous complex process
and completes caryokinesis. As cell division is a non-separable continuous
process, it is not right to divide them into different stage. Still for the benefit of
description, it is divided into five stages. These are (1) Prophase (2)
Pro-metaphase (3) Metaphase (4) Anaphase and (5) Telophase.

Prophase: This is the longest stage of mitosis cell division. At this stage the
following events occurs.

2025
Growth and Heredity of Living Organism 7

~ wucteotus r ss ee Menmbeane fA Chromatid
ee = 5 ty ae " .
(®t (6 C=
iE S| leanbrane | — Chromosome a ada

ie: (> Chromatin . = Pats , ene
re ee eer ette ;
a Cytoplasm = —, \ j
(Mother cell) (Early Prophase} {Late prophase)

Plant cell

Sg —-

- Centrigle a —— Astar ray
: @rr Nucleus uh Generating
W i } |
Nias s - Chromosome
} a

Nucleolus
~Chromatid
Centromere
(Early Prophase}
Animal Cell
Fig. 2.3: Prophase

The nucleus becomes bigger in size.

Due to continuous dehydration nuclear chromatin condenses to form
visible thread like structure, known as chromosome. Then cach
chromosome divides longitudinally into two chromatid. The sister
chromatids are joined together at ther centromere.

sn3[201h]

(Mother cel)

{Late prophase)

Lesson 3 : Pro-metaphase, metaphase, anaphase and _ telophase
Pro-metaphase: This phase is very short. In this phase-

1.
2.

Nuclear membrane and nucleolus almost disappears.

At the end of prophase spindle apparatus is formed by the accumulation of
some protein fibre in the cell. The middle area of two poles of the spindle
apparatus is known as equator. The fibres of the spindle spread from one
pole to another. These are known as spindle fibre. In animal cells, in
addition to formation of spindle apparatus, centriole divides earlier and
reaches the two poles from where aster fiber radiates. Each mechanism of
a spindle machine is called spindle machine. The mechanisms which
connect with the centromere of the chromosomes are called traction fibers

ot attraction fibers.
i 7 nae Fale

i a j Spendle apperatas
I,

|

|

\

i | |. Chrotiasartes
ae Degrercating cucleotus
rat

(jie

(| coembeane

i

Plant call Fig. 2.4: Pro-metaphase Animal cell

Forma-3- Science, Class-8
18 Science

Metaphase : In this step-
1. All the chromosomes come and locate at the equator of spindle apparatus
and get attached to the centromere by spindle fibre.

2. At this stage the chromosomes are found shortest, quite thick and clear.
—«——— Polar region

Spindle fiber
Centromere

Equatorial region
Chromosme bh. Spindle fibre

Polar region

Animal cell

Plant cell Fig, 2.5: Metaphase

Anaphase : In this stage-

1. The centromere of the chromosome now splits so that two independent
daughter chromosome, each with its own centromere, are formed.

2. The chromatids get separated from each other, At this stage each
chromatid is called daughter chromosome.

3. Then the contraction of the attraction fibers attached to the chromosomes
causes half of the daughter chromosome to move towards the north pole and

half towards the south pole. In this time, the chromosomes take the shape of
English letter V, L, J or l according to the position of centromere.

SS — Polar region
a),
i A A \ ~ Centriole
| A pit Daughter chromosome
! — Disappearing Spindle fibre
| = Disappearing spindle thre : ad
|

Animal cell

Fig. 2.6: Anaphase

Lesson 4 : Telophase : In this stage-
1. Daughter chromosomes reach their opposite poles.

2. Spindle fibre disappears and the chromosomes lose their identity, reverting
to a diffuse chromatin network.

3. Finally, nuclear membrane reappears around the two daughter nuclei.
Nucleolus also reappears. In this way, two daughter nuclei formed at two
poles and signal the end of karyokinesis.

2025
2025

Growth and Heredity of Living Organism 19

_ Nuclear
~ Membrane ———
—— Nucltolus ——_
(Chromosomes

Cell plate

ie Speier _\ v

—=— Daughter ~~

Nucleus ——
Plant Cell Animal Cell
Fig. 2.7: Telophase

Cytokinesis

At the end of telophase, cytokinesis starts. In plant cells the equatorial region of
the spindle apparatus gradually becomes wide and touches the cell wall and the
fibres disappear. At the equatorial region fragmoplast of the endoplasmic
reticulum are deposited and they combine together to form a membrane called
plasmalema. By deposition of other components on the plasmalema, cell plate is
formed. Cell wall is developed by the deposition of hemicellulose and other
components on the cell plate. By the development of the cell wall the mother cell
divides into two daughter cells.

Golgi Plasma
apparatus GEL plate Membrane Cell wall

Furtow
Fig. 2.8: Cytokinesis

Animal Cell

In animal cell, a cleavage furrow appears on the surface of the dividing cell and
encircles it at the midline of the spindle. The cleavage furrow deepens and
pinches the plasma membrane as though it were being tightened by an invisible
rubber band and gradually draws the furrow inward. Finally, the infolding edges
of the plasma membrane meet and fuse, completing cell division.

Lesson 5 & 6 : Meiosis
At the beginning of this chapter we have learnt what Meiosis is. The question is
now,why meiosis occurs?
20 Science

In mitosis, mother cell divides and produces two daughter cells bearing same
number of chromosomes as in mother cell. Mitosis is essential for growth and
asexual reproduction. In case of sexual reproduction two gamete (male &
female) cells unite together to form a zygote. So, if the number of chromosome
in gamete cells does not reduce to half of the mother cell, the number of
chromosome becomes double as a result of the union of the two gametes. In case
of meiosis mother cell divides and produces daughter cells bearing half the
number of chromosomes of mother cell. The number of chromosome remain
same, as the mother cell, in the newly formed zygote resulted from the union of
such two gamete cells, As a result of cell division by meiosis the number of
chromosomes of a species remains constant generation after generation. This
happens during formation of gamete and in certain stage of life cycle of the
lower plant. This stage of chromosome is called haploid (n). When two haploid
cell unite, the state of chromosomes ts called diploid.

Reproductive mother cell

Meiosis | | Meiosis

Ovum Sperm Diploid @®

Haploid 2

Fertilization
Zyeoe
Fig. 2.9 : Formation of zygote due to meiosis cell division.
So, the features of the organism are retained in the successive generation by
meiotic cell

Features of Meiosis

1. Meiosis takes place in the reproductive mother cell of diploid organism
and in the zygote of haploid organisms (lower plants).

2. Four haploid daughter cells are produced from a single cell.

3. In this process the nucleus divides twice and chromosomes divide once.

4. The four daughter cells thus formed contain half the number of chromo
some of the mother cells.

Where meiosis takes place?

Meiosis takes place in the diploid (2n) reproductive mother cells durmg formation of

gamete. Meiosis occurs inside the stamen and carpel of flowering plants and in

the testes and ovary of higher animals.Meiosis occurs in the zygote of haploid (n)

an,
Ss
organism. a
2025

Growth and Heredity of Living Organism 21

Meiosis cell division

During meiosis cell division, a primordial germ cell is divided in two successive
phases. First phase is called meiosis-I and the second phase is known as
meiosis-II. During the firsi division, chromosomes of the daughter cells become
half of the mother cells. Second division is same as mitosis. It means that cells
produced in the first division again divide into two daughter cells. As a result,
four daughter cells (mn) are produced from each primordial germ cell (2n).

Meiosis - | Second division
| First division (equational division)
(reduction division)

Meiosis - 2

Fig. 2.10: Concept of meiosis cell division.
Lesson 7-9 : The role of chromosome, DNA and RNA in determination
of heredity
Children inherit some characteristics of their parents. The process by which
characteristics from parent are inherited to the offsprings is called heredity.
Characters inherited to children is known as hereditary characters. Once, the
knowledge of heredity was imaginary. Later on, scientists explain how these
characters inherit to offsprings from their parent.

During the second half of the nineteenth century Gregor |
Johann Mendel first postulated two laws about how the traits
of the parents are transmitted to the offsprings. The research |
of Mendel and his laws of genetics are now well established
as an important branch of life science. The modern theory of
heredity that prevails today, is based on the theory discovered ety
by Melend. This is why Johann Mendel is called the father of Gregor Johann Mende!
heredity. (1822-1884)

22 Science

The nucleus of a cell contains a fixed number of thread- like objects that bear
the hereditary characters of the organism are called chromosome. These are only
visible when a cell is about to divide into two i.e. during prophase stage of
meiosis cell division. Each chromosome consists of two parts-chromatid and
centromere. At prophase stage of meiosis cell division, each chromosome divides
longitudinally into two equal parts, known as chromatid. The point where sister
chromatids are joined is called centromere. During cell division, the spindle
fibres are attached to centromere.

Nucleic Acid

Nucleic acids are of two types-namely DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA
(Ribonucleic acid). DNA is the main component of chromosome. DNA & RNA
play vital role in transmission of hereditary traits.

It is accepted by all that the genes which are located in the chromosomes control
the characteristics of organisms. It is proved from different experiments that,
parts of DNA act as gene, ic. DNA itself is gene. DNA is directly transmitted
from the parents to the progeny,

In case of some virus, DNA is absent (eg. TMV). But in place of it, there is RNA.
In these cases, RNA is the hereditary material. A character of an organism may
be controlled by more than one gene, again a single gene may control several
characters. The eye colour, hair pattern, skin colour etc. of man are controlled by
gene. Like man, characters of other animals and plants are also controlled by
gene. Chromosome acts as carrier and transmit gene from one generation to next
generation, thus maintains the continuity of hereditary traits.

The continuity of such hereditary trait is maintained through meiosis cell
division. To maintain hereditary trait, chromosome carries gene directly from
parent to offsprings during cell division. For this reason, chromosome is known
as the physical basis of heredity.

So, from the above discussion we understand that the hereditary trait is
maintained by meiosis and through reduction of chromosome number, the
individuality of every species is restored.

In human body, each somatic cell bears 46 chromosomes. How many
chromosomes do germ cell and embryo (embryonic) cells contain?

2025
2025

Growth and Heredity of Living Organism 23

New words : Amitosis, mitosis, meiosis, haploid, diploid, spindle fibre,
cytokinessis, DNA, RNA, daughter cell, zygote

What we have learned at the end of this chapter

Growth of organism occurs by cell division.

How many types of cell division and where these occur.

How does the chromosome number in organism remain constant?
What do we understand by haploid and diploid?

Gene is the carrier of heredity and chromosome transmits them from generation to

generation.

Gregor Johann Mendel is the father of genetics.

Exercise
Fill in the blanks
1. In stage the chromosomes with their chromatid take position
at the equatorial region.
2. Reduction of chromosome occurs in division.
3. In Amoeba__ is found.
4. The nature of chromosome in somatic cells is
5. The division of nucleus is called

Multiple Choice Questions

l.

In which stage of mitosis chromosomes becomes shorter and thicker?

a.

Cc.

al.

Prophase b. Pro-metaphase
Metaphase d.  Anaphase

2. Which of the following controls eye colour?
DNA b. RNA
Nucleolus d. Centromere

Cc.
24 Science

Read the following paragraph and answer questions no. 3 & 4

Safwan was examining the root cell of onion under a microscope. In a cell
division stage he found that there is no nuclear membrane and nucleolus, but
chromosomes are located right in the middle.

3. Which stage of cell division Safwan observed?
a. Prophase b. Pro-metaphase
c. Metaphase d. Anaphase

4. In the next phase of Safwan's observation-
i. chromosomes get detached from certromere
ii, chromatid segregates from each other
iil. centromere divides into two sections

Which one of the following is correct?
a i&ii b. i& ill
ce. née ti d. i,t) & iti
Creative Questions
1. Mr, Farabi, the class teacher. was discussing cell division in the science
class. He said, during a stage in cell division, thread like centromere in the
nucleus divides into two parts. As a results the number of chromosomes
remain unchanged in the divided cells
Which type of cell division produces germ cells?
b. What do you mean by amitosis? Explain.
c. Describe with diagram the stage of cell division that Mr. Farabi describes.
d. Explain the role of thread like structure that Mr. Farabi describes.
3. (a | 2a
er

an ( nl
BAA BVAA
or, @ ae

How many chromosomes are there in a human somatic cells?

=

What do you mean by gene?
Explain cell division P?
In case of higher animals compare the cell divisions P and Q.

ao So Fe

2025
