2025

Chapter Seven
The Earth and Gravitation

Newton put forward the law of gravitation that all particles in the universe attract
each other by a force which is proportional to the product of their masses and
inversely as the squares of their distance apart. Does this force of attraction vary
from place to place? On what factor does this force depend? In this chapter, we
will discuss gravitation, gravity, acceleration due to gravity, mass and weight.

At the end of this chapter we will be able to—
e explain gravitation;
¢ explain the distinction between gravitation and gravity;
e explain the acceleration due to gravity;
® distinguish between mass and weight:

¢ explain the change of weight of an object due to the influence of
gravitational acceleration;

e realize the impact of gravitational acceleration in our life.
70 Science

Lesson 1: Gravitation

If we jump we cannot go up very much. We fall back to the surface of the
earth. Fruits fall from trees on the earth. Why do all these happen? The
reason is that the earth attracts these objects towards it. It is not only the
earth that attracts us, in fact all objects in the universe attract one other.
This universal attractive force is called gravitation force.

‘You might have heard the story of Newton and the fall of an apple from the
tree on the ground. As the story goes, Newton was sitting in his garden and
was engaged in thought. Suddenly he saw an apple to fall on the ground.
The question came to his mind, why did the apple fall towards the ground?
Something must be attracting it towards the ground. After much
speculation, he came to the conclusion that the earth attracts every object
towards it. Later on, he came to more specific conclusion that it is not only
the earth but all objects in the universe attract each other towards their
centre. The attractive force that exists between any two particles in the
universe is called gravitational force.

Newton's law of gravitation and gravitational force

Each particle in the universe attracts every other particle with a force
which is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance between them. Newton
developed an important theorem. That the gravitational attraction between
two homogeneous spheres is proportional to the product of their masses
and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between their
centres. This is because for spherical bodies, the whole mass of the sphere
can be assumed to be at the centre of the sphere, provided the observer is
outside the sphere and the sphere is homogeneous.

If we assume that the two point objects or spherical bodies have masses m, and
m, and the distance between them is d. Then the gravitational force F acting
between them is given by

Mm My

F=G—3

2025
2025

The Earth and Gravitation 71

Here G is the consiant of proportionality. lt is called
the universal gravitational constant. This means that if
two spherical bodies, each of which has mass one
kilogram and the distance between them is one meter,
the attractive force between them is G in magnitude. If
the bodies are spherical the distance is measured from
the centres of the spheres.

From the formula of gravitation. we find that if the distance between the two object
is fixed and the product of their masses is doubled, the gravitational force
becomes double. When the product of the masses is three times, the corresponding
force will be three times greater. If the distance between the objects is doubled,
keeping the product of the masses constant, the corresponding force will be one
fourth and when the distance is made three times larger, the corresponding force
becomes one ninth of original force. The earth moves round the sun due to the
influence of gravitational force just as a ball attached to a string can be made to
revolve because of the tension in the string. Now answer— why do the planets revolve
round the sun?

Zw

Fig. 7.1 : Gravitational force

Lesson 2-3 : Gravity and the acceleration due to gravity

Gravity: We know that every material or particle in the universe attracts each
other. When this mutual attraction involves any two objects in the universe, we
call it gravitation. If one of the objects is the earth and the attraction on the object
is due to the earth, we call it gravity. When a cricket ball is thrown upwards, it
falls back to the earth due to the attraction of the earth.

Just as the earth attracts the cricket ball towards it with a downward force, the
cricket ball attracts the earth with the same upward force. But since the earth is
very heavy compared to the cricket ball, it moves very little towards the cricket
ball. On the other hand, the cricket ball having little mass compared to the earth,
accelerates toward the earth. The accelerating force due to the earth on any object
near to it is called gravity. Thus the attractive force between sun and the moon is
called gravitation. But the attractive force thal acts between you and the earth or
between your science book and the earth will be called gravity.

Acceleration due to gravity: We know that when a force is applied on an object its
velocity increases. The rate at which velocity increases with time is called acceleration,

The force of gravity also causes acceleration. This acceleration is called the
acceleration due to gravity. The acceleration due to gravity is indicated by g. Since
g is a form of acceleration, its unit is that of acceleration, that is meter/second’,
72 Science

Let us assume that M = the mass of the earth, m =the mass of an object near
the earth. d = the distance between the object and the centre of the earth
From the formula of gravitation, the gravitation force, p= G Min ‘
Again we get from the relation between force and acceleration, the force of
eravity — mass * acceleration due to gravity. That is F = mg.

From the above relation we get,
_ GMm
a
GM

d?

or, g=

In this equation m is absent on the right side. This means that the acceleration due
to gravity does not depend on the mass of the bocly subjected to gravity. Since G
and the mass of earth M is constant, so the value of g depends on the distance of
matter d from the centre of earth. Thus the value of g is independent of the mass
of the object but is not independent of its position. It means that if the distance of
different places d is different from the center of the earth, the value of g will also
be different at different places.

Variation of the acceleration due to gravity: The distance of the surface from
the center of the earth, that means if the earth is considered round, its radius will
= _ GM

be =R,theng="yr -

Since the earth is not a perfect sphere, R is not really constant. So the value of g
is not equal everywhere at the surface of the earth. As we move from the pole to
the equator, the value of R increases and the value of g decreases. At the equator
the value of g is minimum. It is 9.78 meter/sec? . The value of g in the polar region
is 9.832 meter/sec2 at the surface of the earth. For the convenience of calculation
the value of ¢ is taken as 9.8 meter/sec?. At the surface of the earth, the value of
gis 9.8 meter/sec2 .It means for a freely falling body near the surface of the earth,
the velocity increases by 9.8 meter/sec at every second.

Ifa body is allowed to fall from above, it reaches to the surface of the earth due to
the force of gravity. If we allow a piece of stone and a piece of paper to fall from
the same height, will they teach the surface of the earth at the same time? Since
the acceleration due to gravity does not depend on the mass of the body, therefore
the acceleration acting on both the stone and the paper are the same. As a result
both of them should be expected to reach the surface of the earth at the same time.
But in reality the stone will reach the surface of the earth before the paper. This is
because of the air resistance. Air obstruction is relatively Ingh on a piece of
paper. So, it falls slowly downwards. The stone and the piece of paper would
have reached the ground at the same time if there were no wind obstruction.

2025
The Earth and Gravitation B

Lesson 4: Mass and weight ee 8
In our day to day use of language we often make no distinction between mass and

weight. But in physics the two words mean different entities. In fact when we say
that the weight of a bag of rice is 50 kg, we actually refer to their masses. In this
respect the use of the word weight of an object is scientifically wrong. But what
is the difference between mass and weight’

Mass: All objects are made of materials. Mass of an object refer to the amount of
material present in an object. This property of the material does not depend on
location, shape or state of motion, according to Newtonian physics. The mass of
the objects depends on the number and kind of atoms and the bonds by which the
object 1s formed. The international unit of mass is kg. A heavy mass is expressed
in units of tones. One ton is 1000 kg. Small masses are expressed in units of
gram. Thus the mass of your pencil is 5 gram. Thousand gram make one
kilogram(kg). More appropriate meaning of mass comes from Newton's law
F=ma.

Thus the mass of an object is the ratio of F and acceleration. If the mass is greater
it resists the increase of velocity more for the same applied force. Mass is thus
related to inertia of motion,

Weight: We know that if a body is thrown upward, it comes back to the earth.
This is due to the weight of the body which push the object towards the earth. We
can say the force of gravity causes this downwards pull.

The force with which the earth attracts an object is called its weight. If only the
force of gravity acts on an object and the gravitational acceleration is ¢ at some
point on earth and the mass of the object is m then the weight of the object at that
point will be W, W = mg.

The unit of weight is newton. The weight of an object with mass 10 kilograra is,
W= 10 * 9.8 newton = 98 newton.

Generally, we can determine the weight of an object by using a spring balance.

Lesson 5: The relation between mass and weight

We know that the amount of material in an object is its mass. It is a constant
parameter, which does not change due to change of its location to any height
above the earth. If an astronaut has a mass 7 5 kg, it will remain unchanged when
he is in the surface of the earth or on the surface of the moon or in an orbit of the
moon or earth. The amount of material by which an astronaut is built does not
change due to change of position and that is why its mass remain unchanged.
Since the mass of an object is constant, its weight changes due to change in the

Forma-10- Science, Class-8
74 Science

value of g. As one goes more and more above the surface of the earth, the weight of
an object becomes less and less. The reason for which the value of the
acceleration due to gravity changes are also the causes of change in weight of an
object. The weight of an object is not an fundamental parameter. For example, an
object may have weight at one place and may not have any weight at another
place. At the centre of the earth, the value of acceleration due to gravity is zero
and therefore, the weight of an object there must also be zero. At a distant space,
where there is no gravitational force, the weight of an object must be zero.

The value of the gravitational acceleration of the moon is about 4 of the
gravitational acceleration on the earth. So, the weight of a Ikg object will be
about a8 newton (N) = 1.63 N.

The weight of an object at a location depends on its distance from the centre of
the earth, If the distance is increased, the force of gravity due to earth at that
point decreases. As a result, the weight of an object there decreases, At the
surface of the earth the weight of mass | kilogram is 9.8 newton. But at a distant
point from the earth, its weight decreases with the increase of distance.

The weight of an object vary slightly also at different positions on the surface of
the earth. One reason for this is that, the earth is not a perfect sphere and the
acceleration due to gravity is not same at all the points on the earth's surface.
However, this variation is so small that it can be detected only by using a very
sensitive weighing machine. We neglect this variation in most of our calculation.
An object will weigh maximum at the two poles. At these places one kilogram
will weigh 9.83 newton. At the equator, this weight will be least with a value of
9.78 newton. At the equinoctial point, the weight is 9. 79 newton.

The weight of a body increases in proportion to its mass. Therefore, the
instruments which are used to determine weight can also be used to measure the
mass of the object. Often spring balance is calibrated in units of kilogram.
Balances and weighing instruments are calibrated in such a way that we
sometimes use the kg unit for measuring both mass and weight. It is of course a
wrong practice. Weight is a form of force and for scientific calculation it should
be expressed in units of newton. When we buy a packet of rice or milk on which
one kg is marked, we understand that each of these packets has one kilogram mass.
But their weights are not 1 kg. On the surface of the earth they will weigh 9.8
newton. These packets will weigh different from planets to planets or on the
moon, although their masses will remain unchanged.

2025
al
my
>
a

The Earth and Gravitation 75

Lesson 6: The acceleration due to gravity and the weight of an object are
different at different places on the earth
The weight of an object depends on the acceleration due to gravity g. The
reasons for which the value of g changes are also the reasons for which the
weight of an object changes. The weight of an object is not an invariant quantity.
Its value changes from place to place on earth. The reasons, for which the weight
of an object changes are described below —
(A) At different places on the surface of the earth: The weight of an object is
different at different locations on the earth because of the shape of the earth and
its different locations.
(1) For the shape of the earth: Since the earth is not a perfect sphere,all points
on the surface of the earth are not at equal distance from the centre of the earth.
As the value of g at a point depends on its distance from the centre of the earth,
the value of g becomes different in different places on the earth's surface. At the
equilateral area the radius of the earth is largest and the value of g is lowest (9.
78 meter/sec*) there. This is why weight of an object is minimum in this
region. As we move from the equator to the poles, the radius of the earth
decreases and the value of g increases (9.83 meter/sec*), Because of this the
weight of an object also increases. At the poles the radius of the pole is minimum
and the value of g is maximum. As a result, the weight of an object is highest in
this region.
(2) For the diurnal rotation of the earth: Gravitational acceleration decreases
for rational motion or instantaneous motion of earth around its own axis. If there
was no instantaneous motion (i.c assume there is no day and night on earth). then
the value of gravitational acceleration would have been greater than the current
(rotating earth) gravitational acceleration.
(3) For angular distance (latitude) from pole: Gravitational acceleration
increases progressively from equatorial region to polar region. This also
increases the weight of the object.

(B) For the increase of height from the earth's surface: As we soar to higher
heights, the value of the acceleration due to gravity decreases. Because of the
greater height from the surface of the earth, the lower is the value of the weight
of an object. Thus the value of g is less at the top of a mountain.

(c) At a point inside the earth: As we go deeper inside the earth the value of the
acceleration due to gravity goes on decreasing. Because of this the weight of an
object goes on decreasing, as we go deeper and deeper inside the earth. Thus the
weight of an object is less inside a mine. At the centre of the earth the value of
the acceleration due to gravity is zero. Therefore, if we take an object to the
centre of the earth, there will be no force of attraction of the earth on the object
and its weight will be zero.
76 Science

Lesson7-8 : The variation of weight in a lift and in space: Weightlessness

The value of ¢ is constant al any given location on Earth. As aresull, a person's weight is also
constant at that location. However, a person can experience fluctuations in the perceived
weight, and in certain situations, may even feel weightless. This difference arises because
actual weight and perceived weight are not the same. An example of this is the perceived
weight inside the elevator,

(1) Perceived weight inside a motionless lift: A rider inside a stationary elevator exerts a
force on the floor equal to the actual weight (w = mg). The elevator floor, in turn, exerts an
equal and opposite reaction force on the rider, which the rider perceives as his weight. In this
situation, the perceived weight is equal to the actual weight. |

(2) Perceived weight in an elevator moving at constant ia f _\ »
velocity: A rider in an elevator moving up or down at constant : Fy
velocity is also moving at the same constant velocity. As a result, |
only the rider's actual weight (the force of gravity) acts on him.
The rider exerts a foree on the elevator floor equal to his actual I
weight, and the elevator floor exerts an equal and opposite
reaction force on the rider. Therefore, the rider's perceived x .
weight is equal to his actual weight.

(3) Weight in an upward-accelerating elevator: To start an | \

elevator moving upward from a stationary position, an additional ae PR

upward force—greater than the combined weight of the elevator Fig. 7.2; Litt

and the rider-—must be exerted by the elevator’s cable. This causes the floor of the elevator to
exert a force on the rider that is greater than his actual weight, resulting in a perceived weight
that is higher than his actual weight. This perceived weight can also be considered a reaction
force.

(4) Weight in o downward-accelerating elevator: To move a stationary elevator upward, the
tension in the elevator cables must be reduced from the total weight of the elevator and the
rider. When the elevator moves downward. the floor of the clevator exerts a force on the rider
that is less than their actual weight. So, the rider's perceived weight is less than his actual

weight.

(5) Weight inside a free-falling elevator: If the lift's supporting cable or wire breaks, the
elevator will fall freely downward with the rider, ignoring air resistance and other friction.
Since there 1s no tension in the elevator’s cables due to the break, the floor of the elevator exerts
no force on the nder. As a result, the rider experiences weightlessness.

The free fall of an elevator is similar to a spacecraft orbiting the Earth or the Moon. Astronauts
orbit the Earth ma circular path at a fixed altitude, The weight of the spacecraft (W = mg) and
the weight of the astronaut (W = mg) contribute to this circular motion, and both the spacecraft
and the astronaut experience the same acceleration. Therefore, the acceleration of the astronaut
telative to the walls of the spacecraft is zero, and the astronaut does not exert any force on the
walls or Noor of the spacecrafi. As a result. the astronaut does not feel any reaction force against
his weight and experiences weightlessness, In this condition, if an object is released from the
spacecrafi, it will not fall; even if a glass of water is turned upside down, the water will not fall
either. Everything will appear weightless. Towever, nothing is traly weightless; the astronaut
still has mass, the location has gravitational acceleration (g), and thus, there 1s still the Earth's
attraction, or weight. This momentary sensation of weightlessness is created sirmply because the
spacecraft is moving with acceleration equal to g. If, at that moment, the spacecraft is not
orbiting the Earth in a circular path or is standing still rather than free-falling toward the Earth,
the astronaut will feel his weight.

2025
2025

The Earth and Gravitation 77

New words: Gravity, gravitational constant, acceleration due to gravity, mass,
weight, weightlessness, lift.
What we have learned at the end of this chapter

The attractive force that exists between any two material particles in the
universe due to their masses is called the gravitational force.

Every material particle in the universe attract every other particle and the
value of the mutual attractive force is proportional to the product of their
masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
This force is directed along the line joining the two masses

The attractive force that works between the earth and any other material is
called force of gravity.

The rate at which the velocity of a free fallmg body change due to the force
of gravity is called the acceleration due to gravity.

The ideal value of the g, acceleration due to gravity is 9.8 meter/sec2.

The amount of material present in an object is its mass.

The force with which the earth attracts an object to its centre is called the
weight of an object.

Exercise

Short Answer Questions

1. Ifthe distance between two objects is increased three times, how much
change will occur to the force of attraction between them and why this
change will occur?

2. What do you understand by the acceleration due to gravity?

Write down three points of difference between mass and weight.

4. Explain why the masses of two objects will be the same when measured
by a balance on the earth and the moon.

5. Why there is a difference in the weight of the same object when
measured at the polar region and in the equitorial region.

a

Multiple Choice Questions

1.

What is the unit of weight?
a. gram b. kilogram
c. quintal d. newton

2. Which of the following comments is correct with reference to the mass of an object?

a. The mass of an object changes with the change in its location.

b. The attractive force on an object due to the earth is nothing but mass .
c. The net amount of material in an object is its mass.

d. The unit of mass is newton.
78 Science

From the figure given below, give answer to questions no. 3 and 4

P Q
: 30 gram —~ 40 gram
_ a

jem

3. The attractive force between P and Q depends on-
i. the masses of the object.
ii, the distance between the objects.
itt. the nature of the medium.

Which one is correct?
a i&il b. 1 & ii
c. Ua iil d. iu & i.
4. If the product of the masses of the two objects becomes 3600 gram?, what
will be the change in the force of attraction between them?
a, Will be half b. Will be double
c. Will be three times d. Will be four times

Creative Questions
1. Nuha let a stone of mass 50 gram and a piece of paper to fall from the fifth
floor of their building at the same time. Her brother standing on the ground
observes that stone reached the ground earlier than the piece of paper.
a. What is gravity?
b. What is meant by acceleratiobn due to gravity?
c. Find the weight of the stone?
d. Explain why the stone reached the ground earlier than the paper.
2. A body of mass 120 kg is carried to the moon by a rocket. It is observed
that, though the mass of the object did not change, its weight changed.
a. What is mass?
b. What is the difference between mass and weight?
c. Find the weight of the object on the moon.
d. Will there be any change of weight of the object on the moon? Explain.

2025
