Chapter Six
The Structure of Atoms

Everything that you see around you is made of tiny particles called atoms. Atoms
are far too small to be seen. yet the Scientists have developed ideas about the
structure of atoms indirectly through various experiments and observations.
Different particles have different chararacterestics because they are built by
different type of atoms which have different number of electrons, protons and
neutrons.

At the end of this chapter we will be able to —
e explain the structure of the atom;
explain the atomic number and mass number;
explain what is isotope;
explain the distribution of electrons in atoms;
explain how ions are formed;
distinguish between cation and anion;
formulate the chemical formula by using anion and cation;
describe the use of isotope:
appreciate the importance of isotopes in our life.

Lessonl-3 : The evolution of the idea of atoms and their structure

By now you have known that all materials are formed by tiny particles. These
particles can stay in two forms-one is called atom which is the smallest particle
and the other is molecule, where more than one atom form a stable structure.
About the tiny particles different scientists and philosophers have expressed
different opinions at different time. The Greek philosopher Democritus put forward
for the first time in 400BC, the idea that all matters are formed of tiny particles.
According to him these particles are indivisible, which cannot be divided further.
He called it atom. The word atom was chosen from the Greek word atomos
which means indivisible. Two of his contemporary philosophers Plato and Aristotle

2025
2025

The Structure of Atoms 59

expressed different opinions. According to Aristotle, matter is continuous and
as such particles of matter can be divided into smaller and smaller parts with
work limit. Based on experimental evidence, in 1803 the English scientists John
Dalton said that the smallest particle of an element is an atom which cannot be divided
any further. Dalton's idea got acceptance and the idea of Aristotle was rejected.
In fact atoms are not indivisible and are not the smallest particles of matter.
Atoms can be divided. Atoms consist of smaller particles which are electrons,
protons and neutrons.

To remove the limitations of the atomic concepts of Dalton, later others
proposed alternate models of atom. Out of these models the most accepted
atomic model is the model proposed by Rutherford and Bohr.

Rutherford and his co-workers at one stage carried out an important experiment
to find out the correct structure of the atom. From the results of the experiment,
Rutherford arrived at the conclusion that the whole of the positive charge and
mass is confined to a small area at the center of the atom, This is now called the
nucleus. He also explained that most of the space in an alom is empty and the
negative charge is carried by the electrons, which have negligible mass and
revolves around the central positive charge. Rutherford- model is similar to the
model of the solar system but he did not say anything definitely about the orbit
of the electron. Niels Bohr (in 1913) put forward the idea that the negative
charge carrying particles revolve in certain allowed orbits.

From the above discussions, we can say that atoms are not indivisible. Atoms are
formed by electrons, protons and the neutrons. At the centre of the atom there
exists the nucleus. In the nucleus there are protons with positive charges and
neutrons which are without charge. Most of the mass of the atom is concentrated
at the nucleus. The space between the electrons and the nucleus is empty. In fact
most of the space in the atom is void.

Nucleus

®

Electron otnt
Fig, 6.1; Blectroa, Proton aod Neutron in Helium Atom
60 Science

Lesson 4-6 : Atomic number, mass number and isotopes

Different elements have different types of atoms. For example, the atom of
hydrogen is different from the atom of oxygen. The atom of one element is
different from the atom of another element in respect of atomic size, atomic mass
and characteristics. Why is this difference? The difference in behavior of atoms
arises from the difference in the number of protons and electrons. We know in a normal
atom the net charge is zero. Therefore, the number of electrons and the number
of protons are the same. To explain the behaviour of an atom, the number of
protons is usually used. The number of protons in the nucleus of an atom of an
element is it's atomic number. There is only one proton in the hydrogen atom,
therefore the atomic number is |. There are 8 protons in an oxygen atom and its
atomic number is 8. What information can you get from the atomic number?

Carbon has atomic number 6. Since the atomic number indicates the number of
protons in the atom of a particular element and the number of protons is equal to
the number of electrons in each atom, we can understand that Carbon atom must
have 6 electrons.

Ts it possible to know how many neutrons are there in an atom from its atomic
number? No, it is not possible to know the number of neutrons in an atom from
its atomic number. To know the number of neutrons in an atom one has to know
the atomic number and the mass number of the atom.

The mass of the electrons in an atom is negligible. Most of the mass of an atom
is due to the mass of the nucleus. Again the mass of a proton is nearly equal to
the mass of a neutron. The mass number of an atom of an element is expressed
as the total number of protons and neutrons in the atom. Thus the mass number
of an element is equal to the number of protons in an atom of the element plus
the number of neutrons in the atom.

For example, there are 8 protons and 8 neutrons in nucleus of an oxygen atom, therefore,
the mass number of oxygen is 16. In the case of Sodium there are eleven protons and
12 neutrons. So the mass number of Sodium is 11 + 12=23. It has been discussed
before that, if the atomic number and the mass number are known, the number of
neutrons in the atom can be found out. You will see it clearly from the following
example.

Example: For an element A the atomic number is 17 and the mass number is 5.
Find the number of protons and the number of neutrons in an atom of the
element?

2025
2025

The Structure of Atoms 61

Solution: The atomic number of element A is 17. Since the atomic number is
equal to the number of protons the number of protons in the atom of the element
is 17. Agam the number of electrons in an atom is equal to the number of the
protons. So the number of electrons is 17.

In an atom the number of protons + the numbers of neutrons = mass number of
an atom.

Therefore the number of neutrons in an atom of the element A= Mass number of
the element A-the number of protons in the atom of element A

Thus the number of neutron of an atom of element A= 35-17 =18

Isotope: Already you have come to know that the atom of an element have
definite number of proton and electron but an element may have different mass
number, This is because the atoms of an element may have different number of
neutrons.

(-) Electron
(+) Proton
a 5 Q O Neutron

(a) Protiom (bh) Deuterium (ce) Tritium

Figure 6.2: Hydrogen isotope

For example, every hydrogen atom has one electron and one proton. Most of
hydrogen atoms (protium) have no neutrons. But some hydrogen atoms have one neutron.
These atoms have mass number 2. Again some hydrogen atoms have two
neutron and its mass number 3. These isotopes are shown in the fig. 6.2. In the
same way the different atoms of an element which have the same number of
protons and electrons but different mass number are called isotopes of that
element. Most of the carbon atoms have 6 protons and 6 neutrons in their nuclei.
But some atoms have 7 or § neutrons in their nuclei. Thus mainly carbon has
three isotopes.
62 Science

Lesson7 and 8 : The properties and application of isotopes

Since the number of protons and electrons in different isotopes of an element are
the same, there is no difference in their electrical and chemical properties. This
is because it is the distribution of electrons in the atom that are responsible for
all the electrical and chemical properties. But the isotopes can be separated due
to the difference in their masses.

Usually a particular isotope of an element is more abundant because this isotope
is more stable compared to other isotopes. The unstable isotopes radiate
different radiations and particles due to radioactive decay. These are called
radioactive isotopes. [he properties of radioactive isotopes are used in different
fields. Some of the uses of radioactive isotopes are described below:

Medical uses of isotopes: Isotopes are used in the diagnosis and treatment of
diseases. If there is any defect in a narrow artery, it can be detected by sending
radioactive isotope through the blood flowing in the artery. In the same way the
affected cell of a cancer patient can be determined by sending radioactive
isotopes. Again radioactive isotope can be used to destroy the cancer affected
cells. Another use of radioactive materials is to use its radiation to sterilize
medical instruments.

Application in agriculture: In agriculture the radiation from isotopes are used
to control insects. Also it can be used to find out what type of fertilizer and what
amount of fertilizer is needed for a specific crop.

Fig. 6.5: The use of idotopes in agriculture

Food preservation: Germs and bacteria can be killed by the radiation from
radioactive isotopes. Therefore radioactive isotopes can be used to make food
and fruits free from germs.

2025
2025

The Structure of Atoms 63

Decaying of Bacteria

Fig. 6.4: Use of rays from radioactive materials for bacteria free food.

Use of Isotopes in geological research: You often have heard the news that
fossils have been discovered which are many million years old. How do the
scientists come to know the age of the fossils? It can be found out from the decay
of the isotopes. From the ratio of the stable and unstable isotopes, it is possible
to find out how old the fossil is.

Lesson 9-11 : The way the electrons are distributed in an atom

You have known that electrons revolve around the nucleus. The electron
hasdefinite orbits. Now the question is how many electrons will stay in an
orbit?Look at the diagram 6.2 which represents a hydrogen atom. In the
hydrogen atom there is one electron in its orbit. In helium atom (Fig. 6.1) two
electrons revolve around the nucleus in a single orbit. The rule by which the
maximum numbers of electrons are distributed in the orbits is given by 2n* (here
n= 1, 2,3 are the successive numbers of orbits). This is the rule for the allowed
orbits. Some of these orbits can be filled and the rest can be empty. According to
this a lithium atom has three electrons. Of these two electrons are in the first
orbit and the third is in the second orbit. In the same way a carbon has six
electrons, of which two are in the first orbit and the remaining four electrons are
in the second orbit. According to the rule, the maximum number of allowed
electrons in the first orbit is two, in the second orbit the number is eight. And in
the third orbit the number is eighteen. These orbits are called energy levels,
because each orbit corresponds to definite energy for the electron in 1t. Although
the orbit is a path and energy level is a fixed value of energy, in general sence,
these two terms refer to the orbit itself.

ie)

Fig. 6.5: Lithium atom Fig. 6.6: Carbon atom
64 Science

Now electron distribution of Sodium atom may be seen. There are eleven
electrons in a sodium atom. How these electrons are distributed in different
orbits? They must be in the order 2, 8, 1. This means in the first orbit there will
be 2 electrons, in the second orbit there will be § electrons and in the third orbit
there will be | electron.

Fig. 6.7: Sodium atom
In the above diagram we have shown the distribution of electrons which is easy
to visualize. But to write down the distribution of electrons in a sodium atom, we
can express it as 2, 8, 1. We have shown below the distribution of electrons in the
first 18 elements. Starting from the lowest atomic number

Element Atomic Number Symbol | Electronic configaration
Hydrogen 1

Helium 2

Lithium 3 Li 2,1
Beryllium 4

Boron 5

Carbon 6

Nitrogen 7 N 2,5
Oxygen 8

Fluorine 9

Neon 10

Sodium 1l Na 2, 8, l
Magnesium 12

Aluminium 13

Silicon 14

Phosphorus 15

Sulphur 16

Chlorine 17 cl 2, 8, 7
Argon 18

2025
The Structure of Atoms 65

Lesson 12-13: The electron distribution and properties of elements

The properties of elements are basically determined by the electron distribution
in their orbits. Generally atoms become active or inactive or charged due to
diffeence in electron distribution.

Tf the last orbit has all the electrons that are allowed in that energy level, then that
orbit is completely filled. This type of atoms is inert. For examples, there are two
electrons in a helium atom. The first orbit is allowed to have two electrons.
Therefore the helium atom is inert and stable. Every atom tends to go to such a
stable state.

If the number of electrons in the last orbit or the highest state is such that it can
complete it either by borrowing electrons or losing electrons, it will tend to do
so. This is because, when the outermost orbit is complete, the negative charge of
the electrons shield the equal number of protons in the nucleus. This reduces the
energy of the system and the atom becomes more stable. This redistribution of
the outer electron takes place by sharing the electron with the neighbouring
atoms. For example consider the case of Sodium atom, it has 2 electrons in the
first orbit, 8 electrons in the second orbit and 1 electron in the third orbit. Is it a
maximum stable state? Surely not. If the sodium atom can lose the single
electron in the third orbit, its outer most second orbit becomes full and the atom
will become stable.

The sodium atom will easily lose one electron from the third orbit if some neigh-
bouring atom has the tendency to grab an electron to fill its outermost orbit. But
when the sodium atom lose one electron it is no longer charge neutral. Normal
sodium atom is charge neutral, because it has the same number of protons in the
nucleus as the number of electrons in the orbits. By losing one electron the
sodium atom becomes positively charged. This charged atom is called an ion. If
the charge is positive it is called cation. Thus sodium atom by losing an electron
becomes anion,

Now let us take another example. Florin atom has electron distribution as 2,7.Is
it a maximum stable state? Surely not. For stability it needs § electrons in the outermost
orbit. It can either lose 7 electrons from the second orbit or can grabs one extra
electron to complete the second orbil. From the energy consideration it is far
more favourable to snatch one extra electron to complete the second orbit. In the
vicinity of sodium atoms it can easily take one electron from the sodium atom.
After receiving one electron from outside the florine atom becomes negatively
charged. This makes it a negatively charged ion. It is called anion.

Forma-9- Science, Class-8
66 Science

Thus by receiving or losing electron, atoms become ionized. Of the two atoms,
the one which lose electron becomes cation. The atom which grabs electron
becomes anion or negatively charged ion. As a result an attractive force works
between these oppositely charged ions. If two opositely charged ions come
closer to each other, they form a bond. In this way atoms of elements form
molecules of compounds. You will know more about in higher classes.

Na so Na’ +e.
Fte- ——_» F™
Na+F = —> Na’ F™ or NaF

What we have learned at the end of this chapter-

- Atoms are not indivisible. Atoms are formed by electrons, protons and
neutrons.

- At the center of the atom there is the nucleus. In the nucleus there are
positively charged protons and charge free neutrons. Most of the mass of an
atom is in the nucleus.

- Negatively charged electron revolves in definite orbits or shells with the
nucleus at the centre. The space between the electrons and the nucleus is
empty. In fact most of the space in an atom is empty.

- The first orbit can have maximum of 2? electrons, the second orbit can have
maximum & electrons and the highest number of electrons for the third orbit is
18. These orbits are also called energy levels.

- Ifthe highest orbit has the number of electrons which is the maximum number
allowed, then the orbit is completely full. Such atoms are inert.

- Atoms become comparatively stable and ionized by receiving or losing electrons.

Exercise

Fill in the blanks

According to the opinion of atoms are indivisible.
Most of the mass of the atom is in the

Most of the space of the atomis

The number of in an atom is called the atomic number,
The number of protons in the isotopes of an element is

Sac Oo: Re

2025
2025

The Structure of Atoms 67

Short Answers Question

1. Describe and show with diagram the positions in an atom where
electrons, protons and neutrons are located.

2. The atomic number of Nitrogen is 7. Show with diagram the
distribution of electrons in a Nitrogen atom.

3. Discuss the application of isotopes in Medical treatments and Agriculture.

4. Explain with examples how cation and anions are formed.

Multiple Choice Questions

1. How many electrons can stay in the second orbit of an atom ?
a. 2 b. 8
c. 18 d. 32

2. It can be concluded from the experiment of Rutherford that-
i. atoms are indivisible.
ii. atoms can be divided.
iii. most of the space in an atom is empty.

Which of the following is correct?

a. il b. m

c. i &iiti d. ii & tii
After reading the sentence below, give answers to questions no. 3 and 4.
In an atom of an element there are 10 proton and 8 neutrons .

3, What is the mass number of the atom?
a. 10 b. 16
ce. 18 d. 26

4. Which element is this ?
a. Oxygen b. Sulphur
c. Sodium d. Neon
68

Science

Creative Questions

1. The atomic number of atom X is 11. On the other hand the atomic number of
atom Y is 17 and the number of neutron in the atom is 18.

a.
b.

a 9

How many isotopes of Carbon are there?
What is meant by cation?
What is the mass number of atom Y?

Show the distribution of electrons in X and Y atoms and explain their
ability to form bond between them ?

Fig-1 Fig-2
What is meant by the word atom?

What is meant, when it is said that the atomic number of oxygen is 8?
Explain whether the Fig-1 of stimulus is active or inactive.

Give a comparative description of the atomic structure of the number
] and number 2 atoms.

2025
