2025

Chapter Nine
Electric Circuits and Current Electricity

As we know, the electrons are arranged outside the nucleus of the outermost
atom. The outermost electrons of the atoms in some substances are weakly
bound to the nucleus. In these materials, electrons can move easily and so they
are called conductors. Electric current is the flow of electrons. An electric circuit
is a closed path made of conductive material through which electrons can flow.
In this circuit, electrical devices and equipment can be connected in two main
ways: series and parallel connections.

For current to flow through the components of a circuit, an electric potential
difference must be created between its two ends.

At the end of this chapter we will be able to—
e explain the concepts of electric potential and potential defference;
« explain the idea of AC and DC flow;
e explain the use of resistance, fuse and key in an electric circuit;
e explain the difference between current flow and voltage difference graphically;

e show the difference between current and voltage in series and parallel
cireuits -

* make proper use of ammeter and voltmeter in the measurements of
current and voltage;

e be conscious and make other people conscious about the effective use of
electricity and protection against its wastage.

Lesson 1: Electric potential and electric current

According to modern electron theory, every metal contains some free electrons
that can move freely within the material. When two dissimilar metals are
connected by wires, the flow of negatively charged electrons from one metal to
the other depends on a property of the metals known as potential. For this flow
of electrons to occur, there must be a difference in potential between the two
a4 Science

metal objects. This flow of electrons continues as long as there is a potential
difference between the two metals. We refer to the flow of charge as electric
current. Current flows in metals due to the movement of negatively charged
electrons.

+ —
Electric current > (x)

The amount of charge that flows through any A a
cross-section of a conductor in a given time is
called electric current.

The direction of conventional electric current is ay ie
opposite to the flow of electrons. Unit of < 1H
electric current: The unit of electric current is Fig. 9.1 : Electric circuit
the ampere, usually denoted by the symbol A.

Electric potential: The amount of work required to move a single positive
charge from an infinite distance to a point next to a charged object is called
electric potential.

Electric potential difference

Electric potential difference is the amount of work done to move each unit of
positive charge from one point in an electric field to another. If there is no
potential difference between two points, no current will flow, and no work will
be done,

Lesson 2-3 : Different types of current flow

There are two kinds of current flow. (a) Unidirectional current. (b) Alternating
current.

(a) Non periodic or unidirectional current (DC): If ;

there is no change in the direction of the flow of =

current with time, it is called unidirectional or direct =

current. We get unidirectional current from an electric E

cell or battery. a _ time

Also we can get unidirectional current from a DC Fig. 9.2: Unidirectional current

generator.

2025
2025

Electric Circuits and Current Electricity 95

(b) Alternating current (AC):

1
If the direction of current flow changes repeatedly ir
over time, it is called alternating current (AC). \ py
When the time interval between changes of | YU AY,
direction is constant, it is referred to as periodic t
alternating flow or simply periodic flow. AC is the —- Fig: 9.5: Alternating current
standard current flow in most countries worldwide because it is relatively easy
and affordable to generate and distribute. The source of alternating current is
typically a generator or dynamo, and it is produced in power-generating stations
across the country. The rate of directional change in periodic flow, known as
frequency, varies by country. For example, in Bangladesh, the frequency is fifty
times per second (50 Hz), while in the United States, it is sixty times per second
(60 Hz).
Lesson 4-5 : Resistance
The electric current is produced by the flow of electrons. When there is a differ-
ence in the potential between two points of a conductor the free electrons are
subjected to an electric force and electrons move from the low potential to high
potential. But during this journey the electrons come into collision with the ions
in the metallic conductor. As a result the movement of electrons is hampered and
consequently the flow of current is also hampered. The property of creating
obstacle by conductor is resistance. The property of creating obstacle to the flow
of current is called resistance.
Ohm's law: The flow of current through a conductor is determined by the
differ- ence in the voltage between its two ends. The magnitude of the current
also depends on the dimensions and composition of the conductor and also its
tem- perature, Al a definite temperature the current flowing through a conductor
depends only on the potential difference between its two ends. The resistance of
a conductor is measured from the ratio of the current flowing through the con-
ductor and the potential difference between its two ends at a definite tempera-
ture. Besides, in case of some conductor a relation maintains between the
current flowing through a fixed size conductor and the potential difference
between its two ends at a definite temperature. The relation between voltage and
current for a conductor of defi- nite composition was shaped by George Simon
Ohm (1789-1854). This is known as ohm’s law. Conductors that follow Ohm’s
formula are called Ohmic Conductor.
Ohm's law: At a fixed temperature the current flowing through a particular wire

or conductor is proportional to the voltage difference between the
two ends of the conductor.

Current flow
96 Science

From Ohm's law, we can see that if the voltage between the two ends of a
conductor is high, the current flowing through the conductor will be large and if
the voltage is low, the current will be low.

Y

Electric current (T), Ampere

x
i) volt (V¥) ——>
Fig. 9.4: Graphical representation of Ohm's law.

Vv
We can write Ohm's law as [ec VY and l= R. where I is the current, V is the
voltage and R is the resistance of the conductor.

Thus in a particular conductor the current flowing through it is inversely
proportional to the resistance of the conductor.

The unit of resistance

The unit of resistance in SI unit is ohm. If the voltage difference between the two
ends of a conductor is one volt and the current flowing through it is 1 ampere,
the resistance of the conductor will be 1 ohm.

Lesson 6-8 : Electric circuit

Just as people need a path for walking, electricity also needs a certain path. This
complete or closed path of current flow is called cireuit. When the two ends of a
current source are connected to one or more resistors, electrical devices, or
equipment, an electrical circuit forms. The circuit can be closed or opened by the
help of a key or switch. If the key is closed, the circuit will be complete and
current will flow. If the key is open, the circuit will not be complete and current
will not flow.

In ordinary circuits the electric equipment can be connected in two different
ways. They are

a) series of circuit, b) parallel circuits. R Ry
a) A Series of circuit ) (7)
If in a circuit the resistance electric equipment or red =
components are connected in such a way that one +

end of the first is joined to one end of the second and @. exit ;
the other is joined to one end of third and so on and ‘ta a
the successive connections made a complete circuit, = tH zm K

then we get a series of circuit. Fig 9.5: Series Circuit

2025
Electric Circuits and Current Electricity 97

In the figure resistance Rl and R2 ammeter A and key K are successively
connected. The ammeter is used to measure the current and it is connected in
series with the other components of the circuit. If the ammeter terminals are
marked as + and -, then the positive terminal marked as (+), must be connected
to the positive terminal of the cell. In this circuit the same current flows in all the
components of the circuit. But the potential difference in each part may be
different.

b) A Parallel circuit

If in a circuit more than one resistance or electric component are connected in
such a way that one end of each of them are connected to one common end of a
battery and other ends of all the components are connected to the other end of
the battery. Then such an arrangement forms a parallel circuit. In a parallel
circuit different currents may flow through the individual components but the
voltage will be the same between the two terminals of each components.

In the figure the resistance R,, R, and the voltmeter are (ua ase
- v + parallely connected to each other. A voltmeter is Bulb VR!
used to measure the difference of voltage between the ie,
two terminals of a resistance. This is why a voltmeter is Bulb AY?
connected to the two terminals in Parallel to a
resistance. The positive terminal of the voltmeter Cell Z
marked + must be connected to the positive end of the =e Kg
battery; otherwise you may spoil the instrument. If you _ Fig. 9.6: Parallel Circuit
connect two bulbs in series to a battery would you find the two bulbs to glow in
the same way as when one bulb is connected to the battery?

When the bulbs are in series the same current will flow in both the bulbs but this
current will be lower than the case when one bulb is connected. As a result the
intensity of light will be less when the two bulbs are in series compared to the
case when only one bulb is used.

When the bulbs are connected in series and one of the bulbs is fused, the circuit
will be broken and the other bulb will go off. In case the two bulbs are connected
in parallel and one of the bulbs is fused, the circuit will not be broken and other
bulbs will not go off. Thus in parallel connection we can put off any of the bulbs
without disturbing the other bulbs. The voltage difference of the terminals of
each bulb will be the same. That is, cach bulb will experience the full voltage of
the electric cell. As a result, the brightness of both bulbs will be the same. The
brightness of the bulbs will be same whether they are connected in parallel or
individually to electric cell. In our domestic uses, it is more convenient to use
parallel circuits.

Forma-13- Science, Class-8
38 Science

Activity: Draw the diagram of series circuit and parallel circuit on a white
paper and show the direction of current flow.

Lesson 9-10 : Ammeter and voltmeter

Ammieter

Ammeter is an electrical instrument. With the apparatus we can directly measure
the current in a circuit. Ammeter is connected to a circuit in series. In this
instrument there is a moving coil galvanometer. The galvanometer is an
instrument by which one can identify and measure the current in a circuit. You
will know about it in more detail later on.

To see the direction in the moving coil of the galyanometer a
there is a needle or pointer. The pointer is calibrated in units of ©
ampere, milliampere or microampere and can move over a
scale. Like electric cell, there are two connecting terminals in
an ammeter which are marked as positive and negative
terminals. Usually the positive end is marked red and the
negative end is marked black. The symbol of ammeter is ta Fig, 9.7: Ammetez

Voltmeter

The instrument by which the potential difference between two points in a circuit
can be measured in ampere is called a voltmeter. The voltmeter is connected in
parallel] between the two points which we want to measure the potential
difference.

There is a galvanometer in this insirument. To see its
deflection a needle or pointer is connected to it. The pointer
moves over a scale which is marked in volts. The voltmeter
is connected in parallel between the two points of which the
voltage difference is to be measured. As in the electric cell
or the ammeter there are two terminals in the voltmeter,
One of which is positive and the other is negative. Usually
the positive end is marked red and the negative end is Fig: 9.8; Volimeter
marked black. The symbol of voltmeter is Rasy a .

Lesson 11: Fuses

If the current in an instrument that we use in our day to day life exceeds certain
limit, the instrament will be spoiled. In case the current in the electric circuit of
our house flows too high, it can cause even fire. To avoid such accidents some
special arrangements are made in the circuit. The special arrangement is the use of
fuse. Fuse is usually made of thin wire of an alloy of tin and lead, It is fixed over a
ceramic structure. The wire is thin and its melting point is low. Ifa current flows

2025
2025

Electric Circuits and Current Electricity 99

through it beyond a certain limit it gets very hot and melts. [a

As a result the circuit goes off. This is how by stopping the al ie

current the fuse protects our instruments. The fuse is a .

connected im series in the circuit. ed “SJ
Se SO

The fuses can be with different current carrying limits. “|
Usually fuses of 5 ampere, 15 ampere, 30 ampere and 60 _ ea

: i Fig. 9.9: Fuge 9 7
ampere are used depending on the necessity. A ten ampere
fuse means, no current above 10 ampere can pass through it
because it will then melt and make the circuit off. For
different types of instruments different fuses are used. For electric lamps, fans,
televisions etc. a 5 ampere fuse is used. For electric kettle or calendar a 15
ampere fuse is used, The main fuse of the house may be 30 or 60 ampere.

Try to understand the matter in more detail. Television may be damaged if
currents above 5 ampere flows. Now think that what will happen if you use a 30
ampere fuse for television. It will not serve the purpose. What will happen if a
fuse of 5 ampere is used for electric kettle where more than 5 ampere is needed?
When you put the current on the fuse will burn. The Standard of fuse must be
according to the necessity. The use of fuse greater than the needed will not serve
the purpose of avoiding accidents. [If we use a fuse of value lesser than the
needed, it will burn tao often. Some people use a number of fuse wires when the
fuse wire bums. This should not be done. Because the value of the fuse then
increases. For example the use of two fuses of 10 amperes will make the fuse
work as a 20 ampere fuse.

Lesson 12: The effective use of electricity and to stop its wastage

In our country the demand for electricity is going on increasing. Although plans
are being made according to the demand, we are failing to meet the demand. In
addition to this there is additional threat of climate change. This has created
additional pressure on the demand of electricity. There is an increase of the
number of offices, houses, shopping centers. In big buildings there is demand for
air-conditioners and elevators. There is also demand for electricity in
construction works. To meei the challenge there is need for efforts on the part of
the government as well as on the individual level. Everybody should come forward
to ensure the effective use of electricity and to stop its wastage.

To make proper use of electricity and to stop wastage of energy we can take the
following steps:

® To be conscious about putting off the light, fan, and air-conditioners in

houses and offices unless their uses become essential.
® To use florescence or energy saving bulbs to save electricity.
100

Science

To avoid the use of electricity for cooking and use pressure cooker which
saves

25% energy.

Not to use air-conditioner unnecessarily.

In buying refrigerators one should avoid bigger ones than needed.

To produce their own needed electricity in big factories using their own
generators, which will save energy transmission cost.

To take initiatives to use solar energy which is renewable.

New words : Electric potential, electric current, resistance, Ohm's Law.
Alternating flow, electric circuit, ammeter, unidirectional flow, voltmeter, fuse

What we have learned at the end of this chapter-

When two conductors with a potential difference is connected the electrical
state which determines the direction of the flow of charge is what we call
electrical potential.

So long there is a difference of potential between two points on a conductor;
there is a flow of current.

If we can maintain the potential difference between the points in conductor
the current will continue to flow.

The property of a conductor which resists the flow of current through it when
a voltage is applied is called its resistance.

Ata constant temperature the current through a conductor is proportional to
the potential difference between the two ends of conductor.

When the current flows in a single direction all the time, it is called direct
current.

When the current changes its direction periodically it is called alternating
current.

There are two ways of connecting electrical equipment in a circuit.. These are
called series connections and parallel connection.

With the help of an ammeter the current in a circuit can be measured directly
in units of ampere.

The instrument by which the potential difference between two points in a
circuit can be measured in units of volts is called a voltmeter,

Fuse is a special device in the circuit to avoid accidents.

Everyone has to be conscious about the proper use of electricity and to stop
the wastage of electricity.

2025
2025

Electric Circuits and Current Electricity 101

Exercise
Fill in the blanks
1. Ifthere is between two conductors current will occur.
2. If between the two ends of a conductor is less the____ will be less.
3. If we use a fuse of to an electric kettle, this will

Short Answer Questions

1. Define Ohm's law,

2. What is the relation between the resistance and the current flowing
through a conductor?

Multiple Choice Questions

1. What is the unit of electric current?

a. Coulomb b. Ampere
c. Volt d. Ohm
2. What is the source of alternating current?
a. Battery b. DC Generator
c. Generator d. Electric Cell

After reading the following paragraph answer questions no.3 and 4
There are two bulbs and a fan which are connected in the study room of Mina.
On the other hand in their dining room two tube lights, a fan and an electric
kettle are connected to the circuit.

3. Fuse of which ampere value is to use in the study room of Mina?
a. 5 b. 10
¢. 15 d. 30

4. Ifa fuse of 5 ampere is used in dining room of Mina's family -
i. there will be saving of electricity.
ii. there will accidents occurring quite often.
iii. the fuse will melt, the moment the switch will be made on.
102

Science

Which of the following is correct?

a. 1& ii b. i& iti
c. i & ili d. iii & iti
Creative Questions

1.

Mr. Haque connected two 60 watt bulbs in his office room but connected a
fan and a television in parallel.

a. What is flow of current?

b. What is meant by 5 ampere fuse?

c. Draw a parallel circuit with the instruments of Mr. Haque.

d. Which one of the two circuits is more convenient? Give your opinion
after a comparative discussion.

Presently there are problems in electric circuit of Mr, Kofi's house. For

example, one gets a shock when the switch is made on, the bulb Luses. In

such a situation a electrician was called up. He examined the current and the

voltage in the circuit by using two instruments and found some faults. He

suggested the members of the family about the proper use of electricity.

a. What is resistance’?

b. What is meant by 10 kilo ohms?

c. Show by diagram how he connected the two instruments.

d. If the members of Mr. Kofi's family become conscious about the proper
use of electricity what effect there will be on the personal level and at the
national level? Explain.

2025
2025

Chapter Ten
Acid, Base and Salt

Lemon juice, vinegar, lime, antacid medicine, common salt all are very useful
materials for us. Some of these are sour or acids, some of these are bases and
some are salts. The chemical properties of these are different depending on their
properties they are used for different purposes.

At the end of this chapter we will be able to —
* explain the characteristics of bases and acid;
e explain the properties of base;
e explain the properties of salts ;
e explain the neutral substances;
* use instruments properly for experimental works;
* appreciate the importance of acids, bases and salts in our life;

* create consciousness amongst the member of the group about the
importance of taking safety measures during the experiments.
