Chapter Thirteen
Food and Nutrition

At present there are thousands of species of animals living in this world. They
show variation in their shape-size and characteristics as well as in life style,
nature, food and feeding habit. Therefore, food is very essential for growth,
energy and livelihood of every animal. Food is also essential for sound and
healthy human body. Adequate knowledge about food and nutrition is the
pre-condition of sound and healthy body. We eat organic compounds like
proteins, carbohydrates, fats and oils etc. as food. We get nutrition from these
food. Organic compounds which are used by organism for their growth, repair
and production of energy are called food. And from these foods living beings get
nutrition.

At the end of this chapter we will be able to -
e explain the nutrition value of different food;
e describe different means of prevention of malnutrition related diseases;

® select food-stuffs as per the requirement.

2025
2025

Food and Nutrition 135

Lesson 1: Nutrition, nutrition value and food elements

Torun an engine coal, diesel, petrol, natural gas etc. are used. Can you say what
these fuel are used for? These fuel are burnt to produce energy. This energy
provides speed to the vehicles. The vehicles are kept running by this energy. ‘The
human body is compared with an engine. Like other engines, energy is needed to
run our body. From where we get these energy? Food fulfils the need of nutrition
in our body and supplies energy.

The living organism is the main source of food. Food is mainly composed of
different compounds. We get food mainly from plants and animals. By food we
mean the organic elements used for the growth of body and production of energy
for living beings. The mgredients of food or nutritive substances present in food
perform mainly three functions of our body. For example

® Growth, repair and maintenance of the body.

e Provide heat and calorie.

® Prevent disease, ensure sound health and control metabolic activities (such

asdigestion, respiration, excretion etc).

Nutrition and nutrition value

Nutrition is a process. In this process, food is digested after eating and complex
food ingredients are broken down into simple ingredients suitable to absorption.
The body absorbs these simple ingredients. After absorption, the nutrients reach
all the cells of the body. As a result, every part of the body regenerates the
damaged cells and forms new cells for the growth of the body. Besides, food also
produces heat, provides nutrition to prevent diseases and maintenance of our
body. All these activities of the body are included in the nutrition process.
Therefore, the nutrition elements mean the valuable elements of dietary foods
which ensure energy and appropriate growth of the body, enhance merit and
intelligence, prevent diseases, help for quick recovery from illness and make
human beings active.

The food value of any food depends on the amount and type of elements present
in food. For example. boiled rice contains 79% carbohydrates and 6% fatty
substance. Besides, it contains a minute amount of proteins, vitamins and
mineral salts. 345-349 kilocalorie energy is obtained from 100 gm of rice. The
boiled rice contains carbohydrates, proteins and vitamins. But the amount of
carbohydrates is found more in it. So, rice falls in the group of carbohydrates. In
order to know the nutrition value of any food we need to know the nature of the
food. The nature of food means whether it is a mixed food or pure one. In a
mixed food more than one nutrition elements are present. For example, egg,
milk, hotchpotch, guava, etc. On the other hand, in a pure food only one element
is found. For example sugar, glucose. There is no other elements except
carbohydrate in it.
136 Science

Food elements

Food is composed of a number of chemical elements. These chemical elements
are called food nutrients. There is hardly any food which is made up of only one
element. Based on its nutrients food is classified into three groups. For
example-

l. Proteins—repair, growth and developments of the body.
2. Carbohydrates — produce energy.
3. Lipids or fats— generates heat and energy.

Beside these, other three nutrients of food are also essential. For example-
1. Vitamins - helps in prevention of disease, increases energy and
stimulates different physio-chemical reactions.
2. Mineral salts — they take part in different physiological activities.
3. Water- maintains water balance of the body controls the qualities of the
cells and helps in thermoregulation.

Lesson 2-3 : Carbohydrate and protein
Carbohydrate

We usually eat ruti, puffed rice (muri), chira, bread at our breakfast. These are
carbohydrates. Carbohydrates are energy producing food. Among different
elements of our daily food carbohydrate dominates. The carbohydrates are
easily digested. All carbohydrates are composed of three fundamental elements,
namely- carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. In our body carbohydrate provides
energy for work. Glucose is a kind of simple carbohydrate.

On the basis of chemical composition carbohydrate is divided _

into three groups. Only one carbohydrate molecule makes ay Ke
monosaccharide. This is also called simple carbohydrate. — Rice potato
Through digestion disaccharide and polysaccharide turn into “ey )
sitaple carbohydrate (monosaccharide) and get absorbed into / “

the body. For the balanced nutrition of the body simple "Gree Pura’
carbohydrate is very important because human body can only — Be 41 Carbobysrate ees

absorb it, Of the three carbohydrates - glucose, fructose and galactose, glucose
gets into the whole body through blood stream.

Among carbohydrates, lipids and proteins, carbohydrate is easily digested. Once
absorbed in the body, it generates heat very quickly and supply energy to the
body. One gram of carbohydrate can produce 4 kilocalorie of heat. In a human
body 300-400 2m of carbohydrates can be stored. This quantity of carbohydrate
is able to produce 1200-1600 kilocalorie heat and supply energy to our body.

2025
Food and Nutrition 137

The demand of carbohydrate depends on age, weight of the body, height and the
amount of hard work. An adult male person needs 4.6 gm of carbohydrate per
kilogram of his body weight. An adult person of 60 kg needs (60 x 4.6) gm or
276 gm of carbohydrate a day on an average. Out of the total requirement we
should intake 60-70 percent of calorie from carbohydrate.

Activity : Identification of carbohydrate.

Necessary components : Arrowroot, rice paste, test tube, iodin, water, dropper etc
Methodology: Take a small amount of arrowroot or rice paste into a test tube and mix little
water in it. Now pour two to three drops of iodine solution into it. Observe what happens.
The solution tums blue, From this experiment, the presence of carbohydrates or starches
can be determined.

Deficiency related diseases

The intake of carbohydrate, be it more or less, both have negative impact on our
body. Due to deficiency of carbohydrate malnutrition occurs. Fall of
carbohydrate in blood creates metabolic disorder in the body. If there is a fall of
carbohydrate in blood, symptom of hypoglycemia appears. For
example—Feeling of appetite, Nausea, Excessive sweating, Irregular heart beat.

Proteins

Protein is the composite element of our body. It is composed of carbon,
hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen. Proteins contain 16% of nitrogen. Therefore, in
nutrition science protein is considered as a very important food nutrient. Protein
is a complex compound of amino acids. By the process of digestion it turned into
amino acids, suitable for the body to absorb. As of now a total of 22 types of
amino acids have been found in the nature. The way we arrange Bangla or
English alphabets to get numerous words, the proteins are produced in the same
way alter arranging 22 amino acids in different ways, number and types. For this
reason

Some amino acids are very important for the growth,
repait and balance of nitrogen of the body. These are é; ie
called essential amino acids. These amino acids cannot

be produced in the body. These are to be collected = P** Mit

from food. — /

In food if there is deficiency of animal proteins i.e. “=

essential amino acids, symptoms of various diseases =F" Met
arises. For example—nausea, increase of organic acid Fig. 13.2: Protem foods
in urine, imbalance of nitrogen, etc.

Forma-18- Science, Class-8
138 Science

All proteins are not equally absorbed in the body. The nutrition value of proteins
depends on its digestibility. After having an intake of proteins the proportionate
percentage of protein which is absorbed from the intestine is called the easily
digestible quotient of the proteins. The proteins which are cent percent absorbed
in the body and enhances the growth and repair has the easily digestible quotient
of 1. In this case the intake of proteins and its absorption is equal. Simply it can
be said that the amount of proteins taken by the organism is fully used by body
for its growth and repair. If this is not done the easily digestible quotient has to
be less than 1. The easily digestible quotient of breast milk and eggs is 1. The
easily digestible quotient of other proteins is less than 1.

Activity : Identification of protein.
Necessary components : Egg albumin, mortar, test tube, sodium chloride, copper
sulphate ete

Methodology : A little amount of protein (egg albumin) has to be grind with the
help of a mortar. For smooth grinding a little amount of water may be added to it.
Now take a small amount of protein solution in the test tube. In this solution add
few drops of sodium hydroxide and copper sulphate solution. Can you see any
changes in the solution?

The solution has taken violet colour following the mixing of the chemical elements
with protein sohition. This way the presence of protein can be determined.

Diseases related to the deficiency of proteins

The body of children suffers from different protein deficiency related complica-
tions if food lacks sufficient protems. The growth and developments of the body
is also hampered. When children suffers from malnutrition, the growth of the
body is stopped or delayed. The children suffer from kwashiorkor or merasmus
disease due to protein deficiency.

Symptoms of kwashiorkor disease
e Children lose appetite.

e The muscle becomes scaly and weak, the skin and hair lose their smoothness and
colour.

e Children suffer from diarrhoea, oedema.

e Stomach swells up.

Through proper treatment this disease can be cured, yet a kind of mental
depression persists. [f kwashiorkor tumed acute, it may cause death of the child.

2025
2025

Food and Nutrition 139

Symptoms of merasmus disease
e The growth of the body retarded due to deficiency of both proteins and calorie.
e The body gets lean and thin and reduced to a skeleton.
e The skin becomes rough and keeps falling.
e Body loses the weight.
This state is dangerous for the children. Due to protein deficiency the elderly
people lose their body's resistance and causes anemia.

Lesson 4-5 : Lipids

This is called energy producing ingredients. In lipids carbon, hydrogen and
oxygen are found more in quantity. Since carbon has more combustion quality
the molecules of lipid substance release more heat energy. Lipid is a compound
made up of fatty acid and glycerol. The fatty substance having digested tum into
fatty acid and glycerol.

The fatty acids and glycerol get absorbed in the body through lymph gland
situated in vuli of intestine. In lipids 20 types of fatty acids are found. Fatty acids
are of two types. For example: 1. Unsaturated fatty acids and 2. Saturated fatty
acids,

Fatty acid is formed in liver. But the capacity of liver to produce fatty acid is very
limited. On the other hand there are some fatty acids essential for the body.
These are mainly of plant origin. The usefulness of it cannot be measured by the
quantity of fats present in food. The food that contains more unsaturated fatty
acids is more useful. For example: Soyabean oil, sunflower oil, com oil, sesame
oil ete. The food made with these oils fall under the group of best fatty food. For
example: mayonnaise, salad dressing, kasundi, oil pickles are included in the
group of fatty food. The foods that contain more saturated fatty acids are called
fat enriched food. For example- meat, cheese, butter, dalda, chocolate, nuts, etc.
According to nutrition science out of the daily required energy for the body, 20%
- 30% energy is obtained from fats. We should include those fatty food in our
daily food menu which can supply essential fatty acids and can dissolve vitamins
in solution.

If food lacks in fatty substance deficiency of fat soluble ry

vitamin occurs in the body. This will result in diseases

due to the deficiency of vitamin. For example: skin will al
wil

get dry and rough that will ruin the beauty of the body, Pe
the children will suffer form eczema caused due to the Abin
Fig. 13.3: raniide

deficiency of essential fatty acid. And elderly person lose
resistance against skin disease.
140 Science

Activity ; Identification of lipids.

Necessary components : Soyabean oil, ethanol and water

Methodology : Pour few drops of soybean oil into a test tube. Now mix it with a
little ethanol. Now shake the test tube very well. Now pour a little water further

into the test tube and shake it again. Observe what happens. The oil solution will
be of somewhat muddy colour.

Do the same experiment with the help of mustard, coconut and sesame oil and
describe what happens.

Calorie and work energy of food

The three nutrients of food-carbohydrates. -fypur body

proteins and fats -produce heat for the body.|1 gram of carbohydate can yield 4
: ‘ i F Kilocalorie of onergy

This heat provides energy in our body. To {gaan at cco exe Sia aAISc RIMS UT

know about the nutritive substance and their) energy

amount, the calorie of carbohydrates, proteins | | gram of fat can yield 9 kilocalorie of

and fats has to be determined. In this regard, aoe

the calorie value of vitamins, mineral salts and water has to be considered zero.

In our body digestion of food, respiration, blood circulation etc. are included

among metabolic activities.

The energy needed to rim the metabolic activities is called basal metabolism.
Furthermore, energy is also spent when we do physical labour. We gain energy
from food. The heat produced from food in the body is expressed in calorie.
1000 calorie makes | kilocaloric. Kilocalorie is the measuring unit of heat
obtained from food. The requirement of energy for the body is also determined
in kilocalorie.

The need of calorie for the body of mine, yours, your younger brother and your
father is not the same. In our body energy is spent in two ways. For example-l.
Inside the body e.g basal metabolism and 2. Physical work. The demand of
calorie or heat energy for a person depends mainly on age, height and weight of
the body. Besides, the amount of energy a person uses each day varies according
to sex, body-size, occupation and special conditions such as pregnancy.

In the following chart the intake of calorie and food demand is shown.

The amount of energy used each day by children, women and men of
different age group

2025
2025

Food and Nutrition 14]

Age | Average weight Average energy Age Average weight | Average energy
(year) (kilogram) {kilocalorie) (year) (kilogram) (kilocalorie)
infants females
0.0.5 Month 6 115 10-12, 30 1900
6 Monti - 1.0 9 100 13-15 42 2200
me 16-19 5] 2100
children 20-39 54 2000
1-3 13 1300 40-49 53 1900
4-6 20 1500 50-59 42 1800
7-10 28 1800 60-69 51 1600
70+ 51 1400
males Extra
10-12 40 2200 demand fo
13-15 44 2500 pregnant
16-19 67 3000 women for
20-39 67 2700 first 3 months +150
40-49 70 2400 2nd 3 months +200
50-59 68 2300 3rd 3 months +300
60-69 65 2200) Additional
7O+ 65 1900 demand of +400
lactating mothers

How will we know how much energy a person requires daily? It depends on
three factors. 1. Metabolism 2. physical labour and 3. Influence of food.

Our daily foods should be according to our needs. While selecting foods we
should keep in mind that the body can obtain necessary amount of calorie from
food and it should contain vitamins, mineral salts and other necessary nutrients
also.

Lesson 6: Vitamins

Through different investigations the scientists have proved that food contains a
number of subtle nutrients other than carbohydrates, proteins, fats and mineral
salts. In their absence body suffers from diseases like night blindness, beriberi,
scurvy, etc. The term vitamin refers to an essential dietary factor which is
required by the organism in small amounts and whose absence results in
deficiency diseases. Thus, vitamin can be defined as potent organic compounds
which must be available to the animals so that specific physiological processes
(growth, replacing and repairing worn-out and damaged tissues or energy
production) essential to life may proceed normally. The vitamins do not have
active participation in body formation.

Types of Vitamin: Vitamins are divided into two sub-groups on the basis of
their solubility properties. For example:
142 Science

1. Fat soluble vitamins, e.g.-vitamin-A, vitamin-D, vitamin-E and vitamin-K.
2. Water soluble vitamins, e.g.- vitamin B-complex group and vitamin C.

Source of vitamins: Vitamins are found in green leaves, fresh branches, yellow
and green leafy vegetables, fruits and seeds, etc.

Vitamin A

It is found largely in fish liver oil and animal fats. Vegetables enriched with
carotene such as lalshak, palong shak, puishak, tomatoes, carrots, beets and
pumpkins, etc. Different fruits like papaya, mango, jackiruit contains
vitamin-A, It is also found in sroall fish like mola, dhela etc.

Functions of vitamins

To maintain good eyesight, to keep skin and mucus membrane sound, to
protect the body from different contagious diseases, to help digest food and
promote appetite, to keep blood in normal state and to help in nutrition and

erowth of the body.

Deficiency related diseases

1. Night blindness: The symptoms of this disease is, one cannot see in
inadequate ( dim) light specially at night. The children are the main victim of
this disease. If it continues for a longer period of time, one might lose his
eyesight. If attacked with this disease, green vegetables and coloured fruits
should be added to the food menu of the children. Vitamin-A capsule can
prevent this disease. In our country vitamin-A capsule has given to the
children on vaccination day at different vaccination centre.

2. Xerophthalmia: If there is any deficiency of vitamin 'A', the cornea of one's
eye may be affected. A dry layer appears on cornea. The eyes get dry and
rolling of water from eyes also gets stopped. The eyes cannot tolerate light,
pus gets into the eyes and the eye-lids gets swelled. If proper treatment is done,
the disease may be cured. But if the treatment is not done in time the children
may tum blind. Besides, if there is deficiency of Vitamin 'A', the normal growth
of the body is affected. Diseases like flue, cough, influenza may cause due to
this.

Vitamin B-Complex The function of vitamin B-complex group is to break
down proteins, carbohydrates and fats as part of special enzymes and helps to
release the energy [rom inside.

2025
2025

Food and Nutrition 143

Vitamin B1 (Thiamin): The main function of vitamin B1 is to participate in
carbohydrate metabolism and release energy. Besides, it helps to maintain
normal appetite and to keep nervous system active.

Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin): [t takes part in the metabolism of amino acid, fatty
acid and carbohydrates and helps to produce energy.

Vitamin B6 (Pyridoxine): It helps in energy production.

Lesson 7: Vitamin 'C'

Vitamin-C is very essential nutrient for our body. This vitamin is water soluble
and gets wasted in a little stroke of heat. Since it is not stored in the body, we
should eat it everyday. It is found extensively in all citrus {ruits like lemon,
orange, shaddock, pine apple, guava, amloki, green vegetables like cabbage,
cauliflower, tomato, lettuce. Fresh vegetables and fruits contain more vitamin
'C' than the ripe ones.

Vitamin 'C' strengthens muscle and teeth, heals wounds and resist skin
diseases, prevents infection in throat and nose.

Deficiency related diseases

In adults, acute shortage of vitamin C shows the following symptoms.
e Structure of bones cannot be strong.
e Bones become weak and fragile.

e Skin becomes dry, itches and the healing of wound is delayed.

Scurvy

® The gums swells up and becomes soft,

e The root of the teeth become loose and finally bleeds.

e The enamel weakens and as a result teeth fall, Children and elderly person
suffer most from this disease.

e The glands swells up and mouthache is felt.

e Bleeding does not stop easily, healing of wounds delayed.

e Other diseases like flue, cough easily attack the body.

Remedy
At this stage the advice of a doctor is very essential.

Prevention
A baby should be given, along with breast milk, other supplementary foods like
fruit juice, vegetable soup etc.
144 Science

Vitamin 'D'
Vitamin 'D' is found abundant in edible oil, milk and milk products, different
fish liver oil, egg yolk, butter, ghee, fats and hilsha fish.

Functions
e Forms structure of bones and teeth.
e Increases absorption of calcium in intestine.
« Controls the extent of calcium and phosphorous during blood circulation.

Deficiency related diseases
The deficiency of vitamin 'D' obstructed the absorption and accumulation of
iron, and hamper hemoglobin formation.
Rickets
Symptoms of rickets
Due to the absence of vitamin 'D' and calcium the bones of the children becomes
soft and their growth gets hampered.
e The leg bones become curved like a bow and the other bones also get curved
due to the pressure of the body.
e The bone joint of hands and legs swell up.
@ The ribs also turn bent.

Remedy
At this stage a doctor should be consulted immediately.

Prevention

The children should be given vitamin 'D' enriched food. Vitamin D is obtained from the
cholesterol of our skin under the influence of sunlight. Therefore the children should
be allowed to play in the sun for a while.

Osteomalacia
The rickets in elderly person is known as osteomalacia. The symptoms of this
disease are as follows:
e Due to the deficiency of vitamin 'D' the absorption of calcium is hampered.
e The reserve of calcium and phosphorus reduces.
e There ts a change in the function of thyroid gland.
e Since the bones weaken, their hardness also lessens and as a result there
is a possibility of the bones being broken at a light stroke,
Remedy
If the above symptoms are visible, the advice of a doctor should be sought.
Food containing appropriate amount of calcium and vitamin- D should be
consumed. If needed, medicine should be taken for these food nutrients.

2025
Food and Nutrition 145

Prevention
e Ensure the consumption of vitamin -D and calcium enriched food for children.
e Children should be allowed to play in the sun for a while.

Vitamin 'E'
Edible oil is the best source of vitamin 'E'. Food grains, liver, fats of fish and
meat contain Vitamin 'E'.

Functions
e Vitamin 'E' helps in cell formation.
e Ittakes part in some metabolic activities of the body.

e In very few cases the deficiency of Vitamin 'E' occurs and its deficiency
symptoms are also negligible.

Vitamin 'K'
It is found in green vegetables, tomato, peas, rose hips, spinach, lettuce,
cabbage, cauliflower, egg yolk, soyabean oil and liver.

Functions
e It produces the protein element prothrombin in the body.
e Prothrombin helps in blood coagulation.

Deficiency related diseases

The liver secretes bile and if there is difficulty in the secretion of bile, the
absorption capacity of vitamin ‘k’ is reduced. The bleeding under skin and inside
the body due to the deficiency of vitamin 'k' if not stopped, it may result in the
death of the patient.

Due to vitamin- K deficiency bleeding of a patient, under operation is not
stopped easily. Sometimes it might be fatal.

Fill in the following chequer board

Vitamin Source Function Deficiency related
discases

Forma-19- Science, Class-8
146 Science

Lesson 8 : Mineral salt

Apart from the salt that we eat with rice and vegetables everyday, there are other
types of salts badly needed for the body. Like proteins, carbohydrates, and fats
mineral salts do not produce energy in the body. But salt is an essential elements
for the body cells and body fluids. Food containing calcium, sodium,
magnesium, phosphorus, chlorine, iodine, iron, sulphur etc. all get into the body
and help in body formation. These elements are not found as basic elements in
the body, they exist with other substances as organic and non-organic
compounds. Mineral basically functions in two ways in our body. For example
- it acts as an body forming element and to control the internal activities of the
body. Meat, egg, milk, green vegetables and fruits are the main source of
mineral salt.

Mineral salt forms the body and conirols the internal functions of the body. For,
the formation of bones, teeth, enzyme and hormone, stimulation of nerves,
contraction of muscle, keeping the osmotic balance of the body and activating
different enzymes, mineral salt is an essential element.

Necessity of mineral salts in human body

Calcium forms teeth and bones, coagulates blood and performs the smooth
functioning of the nervous systems. Phosphorus also forms teeth and bones and
makes phospholipids. [ron forms the red blood corpuscles, helps the enzymes in
their function, Iodine helps in the function of thyroid gland and help the
metabolic process to run smoothly. Sodium is essential for most of the body
cells and body fluids. Potassium plays a vital role in the contraction of muscle.

Lesson 9: Deficiency related diseases
Rickets: Calcium is absorbed along with vitamin "D' in the body. Its deficiency
causes rickets. It has been described in the section of vitamin.

Goiter: It is also called ghag. The prevalence of this disease is more in the
northern part of our country especially in Rangpur, Dinajpur, Jamalpur and
Mymensingh district. In the absence of iodine in the body the thyroid gland
becomes bigger and the throat gets inflated. The symptoms of this disease are as
follows:

2025
2025

Food and Nutrition 147

e Inflated thyroid gland.
e Sound produced during breathing.

® Hoarseness of voice.

Feeling discomfort in the throat and face trouble in swallowing of food.
e Patient feels dizziness and weakness.
Remedy

At the early stage of this disease, iodized salt, sea fish, fish liver oil and marine
algae should be eaten. If necessary a doctor should also be consulted for proper
treatment.

Cretinism
Usually children are exposed to this disease due to iodine deficiency.The
symptoms of this disease are as follows:

® Growth of the body becomes slow,

e Thick skin and detormed face.

e Thick lips, large tongue and risk of turning mentally retarded.

Remedy

Proper and timely treatment helps to overcome the problem and to maintains the
normal growth of children.

Prevention
lodized salt should be eaten regularly.
Anemia

Tron is the constituent elements of haemoglobin of red blood corpuscles. People
with iron deficiency may experience this disease. If the children and pregnant
women lack iron in their food, they suffer from anemia. Usually children
attacked with round worm may experience this disease.

Symptoms
e Weakness and drowsiness of head and body.
® Unusually rapid palpitation.
e Dizziness and hard breathing particularly even with light work.
e Loss of weight and appetite.
148 Science

Remedy

Vegetables enriched with iron, fruits, meat, egg yolk, liver, etc. should be eaten
in ample quantity. If needed a doctor may be consulted for proper medication. If
the disease turns acute, the rate of blood circulation through heart may goes up
and one might be at the risk of heart attack following the stoppage of heart beat.

Water

Water is an essential nutrient for our livelihood. Our body contains 60- 70%
water. In the formation of the body the role of water is very much important. The
water remains inside and outside the cells of bones, flesh, skin, nails, teeth etc.
Almost all food contains water. But we meet our demands by drmking water
separately.

Apart from body formation, water controls all the internal activities of the body.
Without water no chemical reaction can take place. Water acts as solvent in the
body. Different mineral salts remain dissolved in water. The digestion of food
goes on in presence of water. Again the food nutrients get absorbed in the body
while they remain dissolved in water.

Function

e@ Water is responsible for blood circulation and thermal regulation of the body.
e Water releases waste materials from the body. For example urine, sweats.
When cholera and diarrohea occur, a great quantity of water is released through
defecation and vomit. If cholera or diarrohea occurs, the patient should be given
oral saline or water-salt beverage (Shorbot). It is the easiest treatment for cholera
or diarrohea. Besides, International Center for Diarrhoeal Disease Research of
Bangladesh (ICDDRB) has produced packet oral saline for this disease. It is
mixed with water and then given to the patient to drink. Recently a saline, named
com saline has been invented. This saline is made up of 1 litre water, 50 gm rice
powder and a pinch of salt.

Task: Earlier you have learnt how to make oral saline. This time you again
prepare oral saline. Write down what precautions you need to undertake
while preparing oral saline.

Dryness

If there is a fall in the quantity of water in the body, the cells experience shortage
of water. When the cell water is reduced one gets very thirsty, the blood pressure
falls, blood circulation and digestion process are hindered. The body loses
weight if there is water shortage and muscles and nerve cells become weaken. If
the water level of the body goes below 20 percent, the normal body function
hampered, the patient gets fainted and even may run the risk of death.

2025
2025

Pood and Nutrition 149

Roughage ( dietary fibre)

Roughage is the part of cereal grains, fruits and vegetables which is not digested.
It passes almost unchanged through the gut. It is not a nutrition element. But it is
very essential to maintain a sound health. Roughage in grains is called bran.
Roughage in fruit and vegetables is the cellulose walls of plant cells. We get
roughage from fibre foods.

Food selection

The foods which meet the demand of the calorie of the body, maintain the
growth and formation of tissue cells and control the metabolic activities of the
body is called balanced diet. Therefore by balanced food we mean the correct
amount of food and the correct proportions of each (six) type of food that meet
the demands of the body of a particular person.

The necessary nutrition elements of food remain in specific quantity in a
balanced diet depending on age, sex, physical condition, work load etc. A
balanced diet chart should be made following some instructions. Such as-

1. In every single meal of the day the inclusion of six food elements
including protein, carbohydrates and fats should be confirmed.

2. Food from each group has to be supplied based on age, sex and occupation.

3, Out of total daily intake of calorie 60-70% from carbohydrates, 10% from
proteins and 30-40% from fatty foods should be taken.

List of balanced diet

Following some guidelines we can make the list of balanced diet. For example:

l. Firstly the list has to be made based on the understanding that the
requirements of different food elements vary according to age, occupation,
and physical status of a particular person.

2. The daily required total energy should be ensured according to the needs of
one's body.

3. The food should contain correct proteins needed for body formation and the
prevention of its decay.
150 Science

. * : . (Chart of balanced di
4, Ensure the presence of appropriate vitamins, — =

mineral salts and water in food.

5. To acquire knowledge about nutrition value and v ‘Be ‘
classification of food. First we have to select fe ae \3
food from the main divisions of food. There gh &
should be variety in food selection. pete |

6. There should be awareness about food habit (ie
while selecting food. incihoal | fects tyeca

7. The food list has to be prepared matching with ‘eats vaapales
the financial ability of an individual and a 1
family as well. aaauaiiiianiia

8. While preparing the list season and weather

condition should be taken into consideration.

New words : Protein, carbohydrate, lipid, vitamin, easily digestible quotient,
amino acid, kwashiorkor, merasmus, xerophthalmia, scurvy, rickets,
osteomalacia, prothrombin, cretinism, anemia.

What we have learned at the end of this chapter-

- The fundamental metabolism is the energy required to run metabolism
process.

- Vitamins and mineral salts are not separate types of food. These all are
obtained from other food-stuffs.

- Water is a very essential nutrient for the body. The digested foods being
dissolved in water, transported to all parts of the body.

Exercise

Short Answer Questions
1. What is kilocalorie?
What are the symptoms of rickets?

2
3. What are the diseases caused due to the deficiency of vitamin 'A"?
4

. What is the necessity of hemoglobin in blood ?

2025
2025

Food and Nutrition 151

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Which one produces heat and energy of the body?
a. Water b. Vitamin

c. Fats d. Mineral salts

2. The deficiency of which vitamin causes rickets in children?
a. Vitamin 'A' b. Vitamin 'C'
ce. Vitamin 'D' d, Vitamin 'E'

Read the following paragraph and answer questions no. 3 & 4

Sumi does not like sour. Even she does not like green vegetables and
tomatoes. Recently she has been experiencing bleeding from her gums.

3. What disease has attacked sumi?

a. Scurvy b. Rickets

c. Merasmus d. Kwashiorkor?

4. What happens to the elderly person due to the deficiency of foods
mentioned in the paragraph?

i, the bones becomes soft
ii. the skin itches and wounds

iii, pain in thoracic cage and ribs appears
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii b. i & iti

c née m d. in&in
132

Science

Creative Questions

1. Nowadays Talha doesn't want to eat anything. He has developed somewhat
apathy towards food and nausea. His skin is getting rough. The doctor, when
contacted, advised him to eat more eggs and drink milk in more quantity.

a.
b.
C.
d.

What is food?
What do we understand by nutrition?
Why did the doctor advised Talha to eat the above mentioned food?

What may happen to Talha afterwards if Talha does not eat the food
prescribed by the doctor?

2. Noorjahan Begum is too much concerned about the physical growth of her
eight year old son Bakul. To ensure Bakul's physical growth and sound
health, she started feeding her son with some especial types of food. But she
put different types of food in the food menu of herself, her husband, Bakul's
srand father and grandmother.

a.
b.

What is protein?
What do we understand by roughage?

How does Noorjahan Begum prepare the food chart for Bakul? Describe.

Justify the rationale behind the selection of different foods for the
members of Noorjahan Begum's family?

2025
