Chapter Three

Diffusion, Osmosis and Transpiration

The roots of plants absorb water and minerals from the soil. These substances
are transported up the stem to the leaves, where it evaporates from the surface.
Intake of carbon dioxide, release ( expel) of oxygen gas, absorption of water and
minerals and transport of these substances to the roots and leaves and
evaporation of water occurs through diffusion, osmosis, absorption,
transportation and transpiration processes.

Due ta transpiration
Weiler Vapour ever oll of
loaves tiregugih di eee “ee

a

; een
Sof water from cone to leaf

x:

“Gy eS =— Absorption of water by pamogia

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to—
e explain diffusion process;
® explain process of osmosis;
e explain loss of water through transpiration;

® explain absorption of water by plants.

Lesson 1-2 : Diffusion

We know, matters (substances) are made up of small molecules. These
molecules are always in motion. In case of liquid and gas, the motion of these
molecules are very fast and show tendency to diffuse towards the regions with
lower concentration from higher ones. This movement of molecules continues
as long as the concentration of the two regions becomes equal. Diffusion stops
at once when the concentration of molecules becomes equal in two region. This
type of movement of molecules is called diffusion.

Forma-4- Science, Class-8
26 Science

Due to kinetic energy of the molecule, a potential pressure is
exerted and consequently the movement of molecules of solutions
or gases from one region of higher concentration to that of a lower
one occurs. This type of pressure is called diffusion pressure.

We can understand the meaning of diffusion through some
experiments. Depending on experimental knowledge and
discussion, practical knowledge on diffusion can be gathered, A
few experiments on diffusion are discussed below- We can see
many examples of diffusion in our surroundings. For example,
the smell of scent, ator or burning incense spreed all around the
room. It happens due to diffusion. High density of atoms from

Activity: Observing diffusion of copper sulphate in Crystal of Lightblue — Degp blue
water, blue vitriol waler water

Requirements: Copper sulphate, beaker, water, etc a
Method: ‘Take some copper sulphate (blue vitriol) £
and pour them into the water of a beaker. Copper i =
sulphate is soluble in water and water will take the / a" =
colour of copper sulphate, Explain why it happens. ( \
Finally prepare a list of diffusion activities which 7 — T

|

occur around us. is it
ial |

Importance of diffusion : Diffusion takes place in every physiological
process of the organism. During photosynthesis, plants absorb carbon dioxide
and release oxygen as by products. Diffusion makes this essential task possible.
Living cells use oxygen for the oxidation of glucose. Oxygen enters into the
cells through diffusion and the release of carbon dioxide also occurs in the same
way. The loss of water in the form of water vapours through transpiration is the
result of diffusion. In case of animal respiration, exchange of oxygen and carbon
dioxide, carrying of food, oxygen etc. from blood to lymph and from lymph to
cells occur through diffusion.

Lesson-3 : Osmosis

To understand the process of osmosis, we need to know the characteristics of the
membrane separating two differently concentrated solutions. Membrane may be
of three types. For example: impermeable membrane, permeable membrane and
sermi-permeable membrane

f ; Fig. 3,1; Diffusion test
incense and scent spread in low density of atoms arounds the of Scent

room. As a result, the whole room becomes scented.

2025
2025

Diffusion, Osmosis and Transpiration 27

Impermeable membrane: The membrane through which molecule of both
solute and solvent cannot pass. Example- polythene, cell wall made up of cutin.

Permeable membrane: The membrane through which molecule of both
solute and solvent can pass easily, Example- cell wall.

Semi-permeable membrane: The membrane through which only the
solvent molecule ( water in case of plants) can pass (but not the solute
molecules) is called semi-permeable membrane. Example- cell membrane,
membrane inside the egg shell, membrane of fish potka (swim bladder/air
bladder), gallbladder membrane of animal etc.

We see that if a raisin or dried grape (kismis) is kept under water for sometime,
it swells up. It happens because dry grape absorbs water and the absorption of
water occurs through osmosis. Osmosis is one kind of diffusion. Osmosis occurs
only in case of liquid and a semi-permeable membrane keeps the two liquid
separate. For our understanding, the example of dry grape is cited here.

We know, when two differently concentrated
solutions are kept together, diffusion occurs
naturally. Look, the raisins or dry grapes have
shrunk because the water inside them is dried act,
up. Now, if dry grapes are kept in water, the ~=
water molecules diffuse into the dry grapes as
the concentrated sucrose solution inside the Died grapes (kismis) are swelled ap
dry grapes are separated from water by a by. absorbing watet chiro. gh camera
membrane. Consequently, only the water molecules Fi 32: Osmosis experiment with died grapes (kismus)
enter into dry grape through the membrane whereas sucrose molecules don't enter.
molecule does not. This type of membrane is known as semi-permeable
membrane. So, the membrane through which only solvent molecule can pass,
but not the solute molecule, is called semi-permeable membrane and the process
in known as osmosis. If two differently concentrated solutions of same solvent
is kept separated by a semi-permeable membrane, the solvent from dilute
solution diffuse through the semi-permeable membrane into the high
concentrated solution and this process is called the osmosis. In other words, solute
flows from the region of higher concentration to the region of lower concentra-
tion through the semipermeable membrane.

es

Lightailstién = Concentrated. soto Glovensar of soleene malecole fom Ais
Fig. 3.3; Proceas of namngis
28 Science

Lesson 4 : Importance of osmosis

Cell membrane or plasma membrane of the living organism acts as semi-permeable
membrane. Mineral salts dissolved in water, enter into and pass out from the cell
through plasma membrane. Intra cellular water and the mineral salt solution
together ts called cell sap or simply sap. 50, osmosis plays a very important role
in maintaining different physio-chemical process of the cell. By this process,
plants absorb water and minerals dissolved in water from soil, through
unicellular root hair.

Due to osmosis turgidity of the cell is increased that keeps stem and leaf fresh
and straight. Also plants can open and close its petals. In the intestine of the
animals digested food may be absorbed.

Activity : Experiment of osmosis.

Requirements : Thistle funnel, swim bladder (air bladder), beaker, concentrated
sugar, stand, clamp

Method: After covering the wide mouth of the thistle funnel by fish potka, it should

be tied tightly with the help of a
thread. Beaker to be filled half
with water. The funnel to be
filled with sugar solution and
placed in a water-filled beaker
clamped with a stand. The
height of sugar solution to be
marked with the help of marker
pen. Keep the experimental set

in a place.

Fig. 3.4: Experimeat of osmosis
(a) At the begining of the experiment (b) After few hours of the experiment.

Observation: After sometime, we can see the height of the solution in the thistle
funnel tube has gone up. Sometime later, we can see the level of the solution
does not rise further.

Now answer the following questions in the light of what you have observed
from the experiment.

1. What type of membrane does the fish potka have?

2. Why did sugar solution rise inside the funnel tube?

3. Why did the solution of the funnel become static without rising upwords?

2025
2025

Diffusion, Osmosis and Transpiration 29

Lesson 5 : Absorption of water and mineral salts

Mechanism of water absorption in plants: The process by which living cells
of the plant body intake water and mineral salt dissolved in water is generally
known as absorption. Terrestrial (land) plants absorb water from soil through
root hairs. Submerged plants absorb water through their whole body. The root
hairs of the terrestrial plants intake capillary water of the soil particles through

OSMOSIS. Capillary water

Soil particle

Root hair region
Root hair “_

Root growth region

Root cap
Fig. 3.5: Different regions of root

The wall of the root hair is permeable. So first it absorbs water through
imbibitions and the absorbed water comes in contact with semi-permeable
plasma membrane below the cell wall. The concentration of the central solution
of the root hair is higher than that of its environment and thus water (solvent)
enters into the cell through endosmosis. The concentration of the cell sap from
the outer membrane to the centre of the root cells is not equal. Consequently due
to inter cellular osmosis water flows from one cell to another and finally reaches
the leaves through xyleme vessels of the stem.

Imbibition: Most of the colloidal substances are hydrophilic. Plant body
contains various colloidal substances, such as starch, cellulose, gelatine, etc.
These substances can absorb water because of their colloidal nature. The process
by which colloidal substances ( cell wall in plants) absorb different liquid ( water
in case of plants) is called imbibition. And the absorbing substance is called
hydrophilic substance.

Absorption of mineral salt by plants ‘
Plani absorbs a good deal of mineral salt from x
the soil for their development and physiological

need. Mineral salt remains in solution form in

: Beil Pyrite
the soil. Fig. 38 Absorption of wuder by root cell rhenmgh panosia
30 Science

The mineral salt remains as solute with _— Root hair
capillary water of soil but the absorption
process of water and mineral salt are different Watnt absorbed through

and there is no relation between the two root hair by ugmogig

processes. Plant cannot absorb the whole salt
molecule. They absorb salt only in the form of
ion. However, the salt absorption process is
divided into two parts. They are 1. Inactive
absorption and 2. Active absorption

Mineral salt absorbed by active:
cor inactive absorption method
through the gowth region of root

Fig. 3.7: Absorption of water and mineral salt through root.

Lesson 6 : Transpiration

Transpiration is a special physiological process of plant. We learn from the
earlier lesson that, water is essential for different physiological work of plant.
For that, plant absorbs a bulk amount of water from soil through root hairs.
Plants use a portion of this water in different metabolic activities and rest of it
goes out in the form of vapour to the atmosphere. The loss of water in the
form of vapour through evaporation from the moist surface of the internal
tissues of the aerial parts of the plants, especially the leaves, is known as transpi-
ration.

There are three kinds of transpiration, based on the outlet of the plant through

which water is lost. Such as-

1. Stomata transpiration: This is the major form of transpiration.

2. Cuticular transpiration: Transpiration through the cuticle of leaves and stem.

3. Lenticular transpiration: Some water vapours go out through lenticels of the
stem.

BLenticel

Fig. 3.8: Site of transpiration

2025
2025

Diffusion, Osmosis and Transpiration 31

The stomata under simple microscope and lenticels of stem in naked eyes can be
seen easily.

Activity : Experiment of transpiration.
Requirement : Potted plants, table, water, polythene, thread, vaseline

Method: Take two plants grown in tubs,
place them on the table and pour
necessary water. Wrap one plant bearing
leaves with polythene. Tie the polythene
with the help of a thread at the base of the
plant and smear vaseline over there to
prevent air and water to pass. Cut all the
leaves of the other plant and wrap it with = F
polythene in the same way. Keep both the cay a,

plants in the sunlight. Fig. 3.9: Transpiration experiment with polythene wrap

Observation: After sometime you will see inside the polythene of the plant with
leaves water droplets appear but they do not appear on the plant without leaves.

Why does water appear inside the polythene of the plant with leaves and not in
plant without leaves? What can you prove from this experiment? What do you
decide from your observation?

Lesson 7 : Significance of transpiration

Transpiration is a very essential and inevitable process for plants. High rate of
transpiration is harmful for the plants. This is why apparently transpiration is
known as the ‘necessary evil’ for the plants. Nevertheless, transpiration is very
much useful for plants because, due to transpiration, excess water is released in
the atmosphere, thus decreases water pressure of the plant body. The
concentration of cell sap is increased due to transpiration. This creates the right
condition for endosmosis. Transpiration prevents plants from getting over
heated and also maintains proper humidity of the leaves. Water is very much
essential for photosynthesis, the process for manufacture of food; transpiration
ensures continuous supply of water to the leaves. Due to transpiration there
develops a pull into the transporting cellular tube which helps to lift the water
through the xylem vessels from root to leaves through stem.

Unlike photosynthesis and respiration, transpiration shows very little effect on
the environment. But in water cycle, terrestrial planis convert land water into
water vapours that go out in the atmosphere through transpiration. During
transpiration a huge amount of water is released in the atmosphere in the form
of water vapours.
32 Science

Lesson 8-10 : Transportation of water and mineral salts

We have already known that plants absorb water and mineral salts from the soil
through root hair of the root. This water and solution of mineral salts must reach the
leaves because leaves mainly use these as raw materials for the manufacture of food
during photosynthesis. Again the leaves send manulactured food to stem and
branches. The process by which absorbed water from root hair reaches leaves and
food from leaves reaches different part of the plant body is known as transportation.
Like absorption, transportation process is of great importance. Transportation takes
place through vascular tissue-xylem and phloem. Water absorbed through root is
cared up to the leaves through xylem tissue and liquid food materials from leaves
teach different parts of the plant body through phloem tissue. So vascular tissues
xylem and phloem are the transporting channels of the plant body, The transporting
process is carried out in the followmg way —
Water enters into the body through root

hair by osmosis and the mineral salt
dissolved in water is absorbed by
inactive and active absorption and reach
xylem tissue. Xylem is responsible for

the upward transport of sap. Liquid food
materials manufactured in the leaves go
down through phloem tissue.

Phloem tissues
sary food up
from leaf

Stem —+

Upward and downward transportation Poise

is known as transportation of plants. dissolved minerals "Hap cration at vO

: : : ; up from roots
Water and minerals dissolved in soil
water absorbed by root hair and

Phioem tissues
__ carry food down
om leaf

transported to the leaves through xylem Oy
vessels can be proved by an experiment. ‘Boil

For this we need Peperomia plant.
The stem and midrib of leaf of this
plant is transparent.

Fig. 3.10: Transportation in plant (reversible)

Activity : Experiment of water transportation.
Requirements : Dopati or Peperomia plant, bottle, cotton, red dye, water

Method: Uproot a Peperomia or Dopati plant and so

wash the root thoroughly in walter. Now take a botile ee , ;
and pour some water and finally drop a few drops of @ : a. cata ee
red dye in it. Put the root part of the plant into the: “hy

bottle and set the experiment as in figure 3.11, Ss Ss

and leaf vein becomes red. Take the plant out of the
bottle. Make a cross or longitudinal section and put
it under a microscope and note what you have
found. After the observation what would be your
conclusion and what would be proved from this?

tre
After a few hours it will be found that, the stem ee ae
Waly e & 4— Coloured wearer

Fig. 3.11: Experiment of water transportation

2025
Diffusion, Osmosis and Transpiration

New words :

absorption, transpiration
What we have learned at the end of this chapter

Process of diffusion and osmosis.
Plants absorb water by diffusion and osmosis and mineral salts from capillary

solution of the soil by active and inactive transportation via root hair.
Water and mineral salts reach the leaves through xylem vessels.

Phloem carries food materials from leaves to different branches and twigs.

Water is essential for manufacture of food materials and osmosis ensures
continuous flow of water to leaves.
Transpiration creates a pull in the xylem vessels and it helps in absorption of
water through root hair.

Exercise

Fill in the blanks

I.
2.

In terrestrial plants transpiration occurs through
Cell membrane is a membrane.

Multiple Choice Questions

I;

What do you mean by the process of release of body water of plants through

leaves?
a. Diffusion b. Osmosis
c. Transpiration d. Imbibitions

During osmosis-

i. semi- permeable membrane is necessary.

ii, solute moves from lower concentration to higher concentration.
iii. solvent moves from lower concentration to higher concentration.

Which of the following is correct?

a oi b oa
c L&ii d. 1 & iii

Forma-4- Science, Class-8

Diffusion, semi-permeable membrane, permeable membrane,

endosmosis, exosmosis, ion, cell sap, active absorption, osmosis, inactive
34 Science

Read the following paragraph and answer questions no. 3 and 4,

Ms. Anowara kept some rajanigandha in the flower vase for her room
decoration. In the evening she found the room was full of fragrance of flowers.
She noticed similarity of this situation to a special process she has learnt in her
science book.

3. What is the special process cited in the stem?

a. Diffusion b. Osmosis

c. Transpiration d. Respiration
4. In the cited process-

i. oxygen enters into the cell.

ii. water releases from plant body,

iii. plant absorbs carbon dioxide for photosynthesis.

Which of the following is correct?

a i&il b. i & iii
c. u&é&il d. iu & iil

Creative Questions

1. One day Zarif’s mother kept some dried grapes (kismis) in water for cooking
vermicelli. After sometime Zarif found that the dried grapes are swollen.
On another side Zarif’s sister was drawing a picture with the help of colour
and brush. At that time a mmute amount of colour from the brush drops into
a glass of water and spread out in the water.

a. What is permeable membrane?

b. What do you understand by imbibition?

c. By which process does the dye from the brush of Zarif’s sister spread
out in the water? Explain.

d. Why is the swollen up process of died grapes (kismis) that Zanf
observed important for plants? Explain.

2. After returning from school Adiba saw that the plants in the tub had
withered away. She watered the plants m the tub in the afternoon. Next
morning she found all the plants alive and afresh.

a. What is diffusion?

b. Why is transpiration called the' necessary evil’?

c. Why did the plants of the tub wither away? Explain.
d. How did the plants become alive? Explain.

Project: Plant a chilli‘tomato sapling in a tub. Add concentrated urea solution
after the sapling becomes afresh. See what changes take place in the
sapling in a few days. Write down your observation and note down also
the cause behind it. Discuss with your teacher what it proves. In the light

of your observation what suggestions do you have for the farmers of
your area?

2025
