Chapter Twelve
The Outer Space and Satellites

We can see the sun in the sky at day time. The cloudless sky of night surprises
us. In a clear night sky there is the moon and innumerable twinkling stars. We
are charmed by their beauty. Above us there is the limitless sky and the mlinite
outer space. The sun, the moon, the planets, the stars, the Milky Way, the
galaxies, the outer space—altogether make our universe. Everything that belongs
to the universe is known as the object of the firmament. In this chapter, we will
discuss about the universe.

At the end of this chapter we will be able to—
e explain the outer space and the universe;
e explain natural and artificial satellites:
« explain the movement of satellites in the orbit;
e describe the uses and importance of artificial satellites:

® appreciate the benefits derived from artificial satellites.

2025
2025

The Outer Space and Satellites 125

Lesson 1 : The outer space

We sce the sun as the brightest object in the sky at day time, You should not
however, look at the sun directly. Because it can cause great harm to your eyes.
When you look up at the sky at a clear night, what do you see? The dark night
sky is dotted with twinkling points of light which we call stars. These may as
well be in the sky as a thin are or as a full circle of light. The brightest planet is
venus and the reddish planet is Mars. Except for the outer planets, all other
points of light are stars. Sometimes you can see a faint glowing band across the
overhead sky when it is clear and dark enough. It is made up of stars too far
away to be seen as separate points of light. This band is known as Milky Way.
If we look through the telescope, we see many more objects in the sky. The
planet Jupiter shines in the sky with its satellites. Outer space is the vast
extension of space in which all objects of the sky including the planets, stars, and
galaxies have their existence. The outer space is mostly empty in which the
material objects in different forms are moving like our the Earth.

Where does the outer space begin?

The atmosphere of the earth rotates along with it. This is why the atmosphere is
taken as a part of the earth and not as a part of outer space. Thus the outer space
begins, where atmosphere ends. The greater portion of the atmosphere exists
near the earth. The air surrounding the earth gets thinner as you go upwards until
there is none at all. When we go about 160 km above the ground, the space
becomes almost empty. Although space itself is almost empty, there are many
exciting things out there such as planets, stars and galaxies. How far the outer
space is extended? In physical science we believe in the observable world. Space
has no meaning unless there are events or the existence of matter in it. Thus the
extension of space in the physical sense is the farthest point in space where from
information can reach us. The most distant galaxy from which light can reach us
determines that size of the universe as also the limit of space.

@
s

Fig. !2.1 : Earth, atmosphere and the onter space

126 Science

In the old concept, space was infinite in its extension. But in modern science the
most distant galaxy from which light can reach us determines the size of the
universe and also the limit of space. You will see that this lintil is very very large
but finite.

Activity: What is space? Know it with the help of different books and
magazines. What are the things are there in space? Write down in your note
book. Compare your findings in a group and present in the class room
(Teacher will help make a group).

Lesson 2: The Universe

How the universe is defined

The Universe is composed of all existing matter and space as a whole. The earth,
the planets, stars far and near, comets, galaxy, small insects, dust, visible and
invisible things all comprise the Universe. Nobody knows how big is the
universe. The shape and size of the universe is unknown to all. Many scientists
think that there is no beginning and ending of the universe. Again some people
believe that the universe has size and shape. Humans are discovering new
information about ihe universe now and then. But much of it is still beyond
knowing.

Although many things are not known to us, the existence of matters in some
parts of the universe is higher than another part. The matters concentrated on a
large volume in some parts of the universe is called ealaxy or star world. Galaxy
is a large croup of planets and stars. Our earth exists in the galaxy of Milky-Way.
There are crores of galaxies in the universe where exists crores of stars.

The galaxies move in groups m the outer space. The stars of the galaxies seem
very hear in comparison to the unlimited outer space, but it is not true. They are
so far from one another. Let us think about the distance among them. We know
that light runs about 0.3 million km. way per second. The distance between the
earth and the sun is about 150 million km; the sun light takes approximetly 8
minutes 20 seconds to reach the earth. On the other hand, the sunlight takes more
than 4 years to reach Alpha Centerio, the nearest star from the sun. Light takes a
few million of years to reach from a farthest star to another fasthest star. Now
you can realize that what is the distance from one star to another star and how
mammoth the univers is!

The solar system exists in the galaxy named Milky-Way. The stars are seen.
twinkling and shining from the earth. Each of the stars is a mass of burning gas
and so it has ight and heat.The stars of the universe are divided into different
colours like red, blue, yellow etc. according to the intensity of their ight. Very
large siars are red, medium stars are yellow and small stars are blue.The stars of
the universe are divided into different colours like red, blue, yellow etc.
according to the intensity of their light. Very large stars are red, medium stars are
yellow and small stars are blue.

2025
2025

The Outer Space and Satellites 127

How the Universe is created?

From the available evidence on the age of the universe, Astronomers think that
the Universe started with a massive explosion, this is called Big Bang Theory.
According to this theory, the universe was once extremely hot and infinitely
dense at points. According to the Big Bang theory, the universe spontaneously
expanded very rapidly. It happened about 13.75 billion years ago. A huge
explosion sent everything racing outwards in all directions. Before the Big Bang
everything was packed incredibly close together to a point of high temperature
and density, Over time it has expanded into the Universe we see today.

When scientists look at distant galaxies they see that other galaxies are moving
away from our galaxy. More distant galaxies are moving away faster. In fact all
the galaxies are moving away from each other. We say that the Universe is
expanding. All the astrologers, including the famous physicist Stephen Hawking
of the present time, Have expressed their opinion in favour of this theory.
Lesson 3 : Natural Planet or Satellite
The galaxy to which we belong, you know, is
the Milky-Way. In this Milky-Way the sun is
located along with its family members. They
together form the solar system where §
planets are revolving round the sun, The
objects which revolve round the sun are
called planets. These planets are Mercury,
Venus. Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus Fig 12 2: Solae System

and Neptune.

Some of the planets have more than one satellite. The objects which revolve
around the planets are called satellites. For example, the moon is revolving round
the Earth and Earth's Satellite. So, the earth is a planet of the sun and the moon
is a Satellite of the earth. Do the activity below and you will understand the
motion of planets and satellite.

Activity: Understanding about the motion of the planets and Satellites.

Methodology: Stand in an open space. Ask one of your friends to stand at a
definite position. Draw a big cirele with your friend at the center. You take your
position at one point on the circumference of the circle. Ask another of your
friends to move in a smaller circle with you at the center. Now if you move n
the bigger circle with your first friend at the center of the circle and your
second friend revolves around the smaller circle with you at its center, your
first friend can be taken as the sun, you can be considered the earth and your

second friend can be considered the moon.

128 Science

Astronomers think that a few cosmic clouds revolved around a star when the
planet was born. They condense due to the force of gravity and eventually
solidify and transform into planets. In this way, again satellites are formed
around the planet. These satellites are natural satellites. The planets and
satellites do not radiate light or heat because they are not big enough to start
nuclear reaction as happened in stars. Sunlight is reflected falling on them. The
Earth has | satellite, Mars has 2 satellites, Jupiter has 67 satellites, Saturn has 62
satellites, Uranus has 27 satellites, and Neptune has 14 satellites*. They revolve
round the planets due to the influence of the force of gravity of their respective
planets.

Lesson 4 ; Artificial Satellites and history of their development

A smaller body orbiting a larger one, usually a planet, is called a satellite. An
artificial satellite is a space vehicle designed to orbit a large body, usually the
earth.

The moon is a natural satellite of our earth. An artificial satellite is much smaller
than the moon and moves in a much smaller orbit. For every orbit there must be
a definite outward centrifugal acceleration of the satellite to balance the inward.
attraction due to gravity. For this the velocity of a satellite is smaller when its
distance from the earth is larger. It then takes more time to complete one revolu-
tion round the earth. We know that the earth revolves on its axis once in 24 hours.
If an artificial satellite revolves round the earth in 24 hours, it will appear to be
at rest with respect to the earth.

The history of artificial satellite is not very old. The first journey into the outer
space was initiated by the Soviet Union on 4th October, 1957 when they sent the
artificial satellite Sputnik 1. The meaning of the word Sputnik is travelling mate.
In the same year they sent Sputnik 2 on 2nd December. The first American
artificial satellite was Explorer- 1, which was launched on 2nd February 1958.
Vostok-1 was the first manned space mission by Soviet Union which carried the
first person in space Yuri Gagarin on 12th April, 1961. Valentina Tereshkova of
USSR is the first woman who went to space on 16th June, 1963 in Vostok-6.
Intelset-1 was launched as communication satellite for commercial use. For
remote sensing the satellite Candset-1 was launched in 1972. A satellite, named
Apollo Souz test project, was sent first on a mission in 1975 for international
communication. Over 5000 satellites have been launched to transmit telephone,
radio and television signals around the world. Fewer than half are still orbiting
and many have stopped working and are orbiting as space junk.

Ref * www.encyclopediabritanica.com

2025
The Outer Space and Satellites 129

Lesson 5: The movement of an Artificial Satellite

For the orbital motion of a satellite around the earth there must be a centripetal
force working inwards. This force comes from the earth's gravitational
attraction. The calculation shows that to launch a satellite into an orbit round the
earth a speed of about 8 kilometer per second is needed when the satellite is

litted above 250 kilometers parallel to the earth. But it is not an easy matter to
apply so much velocity to an object at this height. Because the intense friction
with the atmosphere will create as much temperature that the object will be burnt
and turned into ashes. This speed is achieved by using a multi-stage launching
system. As the first stage motor uses up its fuel, it drops off. So the second stage
rocket does not carry its weights. The speed is increased stage by stage because
at lower atmosphere the air friction is larger for the higher density of air. This can
create enormous heat and burn the rocket. Then the satellite begins to revolve
round the earth. To understand how an artificial satellite orbits the earth you can
do the following experiment.

Activity: To understand the revolving motion of
artificial satellites round the earth,

Methodology: Fix a tennis ball at the end of a sort q
thread of length one meter or so. Now holding the ¢ eee 2 /
other end of the thread, throw the tennis ball in a eg a

plane parallel to the earth's space. You will notice hea i—
that after passing a little distance it shows a
tendency of circular movement. If you want to ia
revolve the ball holding the end of the thread, the

ball will revolve in circle due to tension of the

thread. Here the inward pull on the thread is analogous to the gravitational
force and the outward tension on the thread is centrifugal force due to the
rotational motion of the ball. The circular path of the ball is analogous to the
orbit of the satellite and the ball here is representing the satellite.

You can now see why the satellite revolves in definite orbits round the earth after
launching.

Lesson 6-7 : The importance and uses of Artificial Satellites

Artificial satellites are used for different purposes. They are named according to
their uses. For example— Communication Satellite, Weather Satellite, Earth
Observation Satellite, Military Satellite, Navigation Satellite and Astronomical
Satellite.

Fotima-17- Science, Class-8
130 Science

Communication Satellite

We often communicate with the outside world over telephone. When we use the
telephone a radio wave is sent through a dish antenna from our country to an
artificial satellite. The satellite transmits the radio signal to the antenna of the
receiving country. From there it reaches the telephone of the person with whom
we are talking.

We also watch different cultural functions and games like World Cup or
Olympic Games held in various countries through artificial satellites. It works in
the same way where the signal is first sent to a satellite from a dish antenna which
in its tam send it to our dish antenna. Finally the information is shown in our
television. Here the satellite works as a relay station. This satellite carries
television program and telephone news from one end of the earth to other end.
For this reason the name of it is communication satellite.

Weather Satellites
These satellites transmit images of the weather and earth's environment. They

helped to show that the ozone layer was being depleted. The news that we get
through radio, television and newspaper are obtained by the use of weather
satellites. It is due to weather satellites the weather forecast is possible about
rainfall, wind and cyclone is possible quite in advance. This satellite can help by
informing whether a forest is on fire or there lies an iceberg in the course of a
ship. Besides, this satellite is used to identify the pollution of soil, water and air.
Earth Observation Satellite

These satellites can give us clean pictures of earth's surface. Because it can
take photographs from high altitude and can observe the position of the ships in
the sea and possible leakage of oil from ships causing pollution. They can
observe the fields of crops over vast areas and find out where crops are growing
well and where there is invasion of insects. Earth observation satellites are also
used for discovering minerals and locate mountains and forests with great
accuracy.

Military Satellite

These satellites are used by governments for military purposes. These act as
spies in the sky and used to locate enemy positions and to find out whether there
is any preparation for invasion by the enemy.

Navigation Satellite
We travel by cars, trains, ships and planes. Navigation satellites are used to

locate the exact positions of vehicles, Marine vessel and aeroplane, especially
when they are lost or accidents happen.

=

in
os

=
Py
2025

The Outer Space and Satellites 131

Astronomical Satellite

Astronomical satellites are used to observe the planets, stars, galaxies and all
objects in the sky by carrying telescopes much above the atmosphere. This gives
better visibility because light ravs are not scattered by the air molecules of the
atmosphere.

New words : Planets, Outer Space, Milky Way, Solar System, Satellite, Universe

What we have learned at the end of this Chapter-

Planets, Stars, Milky Way exist in the space is called the outer space.

The planets, Stars and everything from which information can reach us in one
way or another constitute our universe.

Many billions of stars that are bound together by their mutual gravitational force
and move together in space as a bound system is called a galaxy. There are a vast
number of stars in a galaxy and there are a vast number of galaxies m our
umverse.

The galaxy to which our solar system belongs is called the Milky Way.

The sun is a star which radiates its own heat and light and has eight planets and
other objects bound to each by gravitation. The planets are Mercury, Venus,
Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune.

The astronomical objects that revolve around the stars are called planets. The
objects that revolve around the planets are called satellites.

The objects that are sent by men to the outer space to revolve round the earth is
called artificial satellite.

According to the tasks carried out by the artificial satellites they are named as
commercial satellites, Communication Satellite, Weather Satellite, Earth
Observation Satellite, Military Satellite, Navigation Satellite, Astronomical
Satellite etc.
132

Science

Exercise

Fill in the blanks

galaxies are wandering .

1
2. The objects revolving around the planets are called
Bs
4
5

The galaxy to which our solar system belongs is called

. The human designed are called artificial satellite.

The first woman to go to is Valentina Tereshkova.

Short Answer Questions

aE ee oS

6.

What is the distinction between outer space and free space?
Explain the vastness of the Universe.

What is meant by galaxy? To which galaxy do we belong?
What is Solar System? What objects are there?

Why does the artificial satellites revolve around earth?

Satellites serve many useful purposes - explain.

Multiple Choice Questions

1. How many satellites are there in Jupiter?

a, 14 b, 27
c. 62 d. 67
2. galaxy is —

i.

a vast number of stars in the untverse which are bound by the gravitational
force.

ii. the empty space between the planets and the stars.

in. the heavenly objects that revolve around a star.

Which of the following is correct?

da.

Cc,

i b

1& il d. iu & iu

2025
2025

The Outer Space and Satellites 133

Answer the questions no, 3 and 4 according to the table given below

Artificial Function
Satellite

M

Determining the presence of ice-berg along the path of the ship.

Determining the position of a plane in the sky.

Exploring unknown information about the Universe.

sw/O}2

Gathering information about the insects attacking crops by photography.

3. Which is the satellite N’

a.
CG.

Communication Satellite b. Navigation Satellite
Astronomical Satellite d. Earth Observation Satellite

4, Based on the uses given in the table which two satellites are of the same type?

a M&N b N&O
c O&P d. M&P
Creative Questions

1. The merchant Baker heard through radio from a fishing boat that cyclone is
likely to come in the south of the Bay of Bengal. It can hit the shore at any
moment. At the Cox's bazaar coast danger signal 3 is announced and fishing
boats are asked to stay at the shore.

a.
b.
C.

ao oP

What is artificial satellite?
What do you understand by the term Universe?

Where from the radio office got the information about the cyclone?
How the merchant is benefited?

How can the news warn the merchant Backer and the coastal people?
Give explanation.

What is outer space?
What is the difference between the moon and an artificial satellite?
What type of satellite is P?

Give a comparative discussion on P, Q and R satellites.

Project: Design a model of solar system with the help of a teacher.
