=
S
wy

Chapter Five
Co-ordination and Secretion

Co-ordination is very important for living organisms. Like animals, plants also
need co-ordination among their different functions. Growth, reproduction,
sensitivity and reflex action etc. are the characteristics of living organisms.
Hormone plays essential role in doing these functions. Unlike animals, plants
have no specialized system. Except lower animals, all higher animals have
specialized system for performing different physiological activity of the body.
The co-ordination and integration among different organs of the body and to
respond to stimuli in order to keep harmony with the environment are the main

function of nervous system.
ge:
ti if
= ae

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to—
e explain co-ordination in plants and human:

e explain the function of nervous system with a flow chart;
e explain with example the stimulating activity of plants;
explain with example the stimulating activity of human;
explain the excretion of plants and animals.
Lesson 1-3 : Co-ordination in plants

Inside each plant cell, different physiological activities occur under some rules
and regulations. So, co-ordination is an essential activity of the organism. In
absence of this co-ordination, life of living beings will be disorganized. Different
stages of life cycle of a plant, such as- germination, flowering, fruit formation,
decaying, dormancy etc. maintain an order. The influence of weather and
climatic factors are notable here.

Different physiological activities of plants, including growth and movement, are
performed systematically following some specific orders. One activity does not
hamper another activity. Scientists tried to know how plants co-ordinate all these
activities. They opined that growth and development, origin of different organs etc.
af BO Science.

of plants are controlled by some intrinsic secretion of plants. This organic
compound is known as phytohormone or growth regulating substance. It
controls all the physio-chemical activity of the plant. Plant hormones are the
natural growth substances, which are usually synthesized in one part of a plant
and are translocated to other parts where they exert their influences. Hormones
found in plants are- auxins, gibberellins and cytokinins which enhance growth.
Abscisic acid and ethylene acts as growth retarding agents. Florigen is
synthesized in leaves and translocated to leaf base(stalk) and it transforms buds
into flower buds. So, it is found that florigen influences on the initiation of
flowers.

Auxin: Charles Darwin first discovered this hormone. He observed the effect of
light on the plumule membrane. When light falls obliquely on one side, the
plumule grows towards the light source by bending gradually. In fact, the
substance of the apical part of the plumule was a growth hormone auxin. Auxins
can induce adventitious roots in stem cutting and plays an important role in
inhibiting the process of abscission of fruits.

Gibberellin: It is found in seedlings, cotyledon and growing parts of leaves. Due
to its effect the internode of the plants elongate. For this reason, when applied
to a dwarf plant it grows in height. Gibberellins are known to overcome the
dormancy of seeds.

Ethylene: This gas has been found to be very significant as it is produced by
almost all the fleshy fruits during the process of ripening. For this reason,
ethylene is now regarded as a gaseous phytohormone. This hormone is also
present in fruits, flowers, seeds, leaves and roots. Ethylene can eliminate the
normal geotropic responses of seedlings and consequently deformed seedlings
are produced,

Movement: Like other living organisms, plants also have sensitivity. Due to this,
effect of internal or external stimuli on plant body creates sensation and consequently
plant moves and grows. This type of movement is known as tropic movement.

2025
Co-ordination and Secretion 49

Experiment on phototropism of plants

Requirements: A transparent bottle with wide mouth, nutritive solution, cork
with a hole, a fresh seedling.

Experiment: Take a bottle and filled it with nutritive positive |
solution, put its cork and place the seedling through the —abeteropian
hole in such a way that the roots remain submerged under
nulitive solution, Now keep the bottle on a window sill.

that the stem and leaf stalks respond by growing towards
the light i.e. they bend so that the leaves face the light.

: Pree P ‘ Fig. 5.1: Plant responses to light.
The roots bend in opposite direction of the light source.

Inference: From this experiment it is proved that the stems generally show a
curvature towards the source of light but the roots grow away from the source of

light.
Task: After discussion with your teacher set an experiment to verity that
gravity affects the growth of plant.

Use of hormone: Auxin and other artificial hormones induce root in stem
cutting. Indole acetic acid (one type of auxin) helps in repair of wear and tear.
Application of auxin delayed abscission of fruits. Different stinquli like light,
water, gravity etc. influence the growth of plants.

Lesson 4-5 : Nervous system

In class six you have known from classification, the characteristics of unicellular
and multicellular organisms. There are different structures of tissue, organ and
organ systema etc. in multicellular organism. In different organs, there is an
assemblage of various functions of numerous cells. To coordinate with these
functions and to keep harmony with the environment body needs quick
coordinating system. Such as-someone's evil news makes you cry but good
news makes you cheerful, your good result in examination makes you delightful.
Various stimuli provokes all these activities. To carry stimuli from different parts
of the body, coordinate the activities of the different organ systems of the body
and to keep harmony with the environment are the main functions of nervous
system.

Forma-7- Science, Class-8
50 Science

The system of animal body which maintains communication between different
organs, coordinates the functions of all other systems and respond to stimuli in
order to keep harmony with the environment is called the nervous system. Brain
is the main part of the nervous system. The brain of man is the most developed
one amongst all animals and man is therefore known as the best creature of the
universe. Brain is formed by numerous specialized cells called neurone or nerve
cell.

Nerve cell or neurone

The structural and functional unit of nervous system _| Deni
. i ] Plasma
is the neurone. A neurone is the longest cell of the eee Sie

human body. “s /
A typical neurone is mainly divided into two parts, F= cytoplasm
namely- 8 1, Cell body and 2. Processes.

+— Node of Ranvier
1. Cell body: The cell body is the main part of the _— Myelin Sheath
neurone. The cell body may be of different shapes, for 4— Axon

example, round, oval or star-shaped. The cell body is
composed of cell membrane, cytoplasm and nucleus.
Nerve cells have no centriole, so they cannot divide
like other cells.

ft i ™s
Fig. 3.2: Neurone

2. Processes: The branched, tree like structures that extend from the cell body
are called processes. The processes are of two types,such as - (a) Axon and (b)
Dendron.

a) Axon: The long, thread like structure originated from the cell body is called
axon. There is usually only one axon per neurone. The end (opposite to the cell
body) of an axon breaks up into many fine branches.

b) Dendron: The branched structures originated around the cell body are termed

as dendron. They are small, relatively wide, and breaks up into fine terminal
branches called dendrites. They conduct impulses towards the cell body.

Synapse: The junction between the two neurons where axon of one neurone
ends and the dendrons of another neurone arises known as synapse. Synapses
allow information to pass from one neurone to another.

2025
al
my
>
a

Co-ordination and Secretion 31

Stimuli transmission of
gengory neurone fibre

ail

<=
Centzal oS TOS SH =a
nervous bs

syslem

Stimuli transmission of
motor neurone fibre

Fig. 5.3: Flow chart of the transmission of an impulse of the nervous system.

To carry stimuli, to maintain communications between internal and external
environment of the body, coordinate the activities of different organ systems of
the body, retain memory and to think and pass instructions for work are the
functions of neurone. The transmission of impulses through the synapses of
nervous system (neurone) are shown in the figure.

The nervous system consists of mainly three parts, namely, (1) Central nervous
system (2) Peripheral nervous system and (3) Autonomic nervous system.

Lesson 6-7: Brain

Central nervous system:

The central nervous system consists of brain and spinal cord. Brain is the sole
controlling agent of the whole nervous system. Human brain is contained and
protected within the skull. Brain is covered by three layers of membranes called
meninges. Human brain has three major parts - (1) Cerebrum (Fore brain), (2)
Mid brain and (3) Hind brain.

1) Cerebrum: The cerebrum is the main part of the human brain. It consists of
two incompletely divided lobes, the right and the left cerebral hemisphere (lobe).
The two hemispheres are connected to each other by broad tract of nerve fibres.
The human cerebrum is comparatively more developed than im any other
animals. The exterior surface of the cerebrum, the cerebral cortex, is a convu-
lated, or folded, greyish layer of cell bodies or neurones known as the grey
matter. The grey matter covers an underlying mass of fibres or axon called the
white matter. Only nerve fibres or axons are present here and no cell body is
found. As the nerve fibres are white in colour, the layer beneath the cortex is
known as white matter. Grey matter has many layers of nerve cells. These nerve
cells, by accumulation, forms nerve centre in different parts of the cerebrum.
These centre acts as functional site for specialized activities. Vision, hearing,
smell, thinking, memory, knowledge, conscience, intelligence, and movement of
muscles are controlled by these nerve centre.
32 Science

The lower part of the cerebrum constitute the thalamus and hypothalamus.
These are the collection of grey matter. Anger, shame, hot, cold, sleep,
temperature regulation and movement of the body are controlled by this region.

2) Mid brain: The area between cerebrum and pons is
called mid brain. It acts as centre for auditory and visual a
reflexes. AALS

3) Hind brain: It is located at the lower back of the
cerebrum. It is smaller than cerebrum. The main

Cereorum

Lid brain
P caries

function of the hind brain is to maintain the balance of JN, irae + Pons

the body. It also controls speech and movement of the ‘AA ir Pd

body. The hind brain consists of three parts- is Spinal cord
Cerebellum: Cerebellum is located at the back of the a u

brain and behind pons. It remains suspended. ) g Ips)
Cerebellum is divided into right and left part. Fig, 5.4: Structure of brain
Pons: It is located in front of and under the cerebellum, connecting medulla oblongata

with the upper parts of the brain.

Medulla oblongata: The long stalk-like lowermost portion of the brain stem is
called the medulla oblongata. Starting from the lower end of pons the medulla
oblongata extends up to spinal cord. It connects the brain with the spinal cord.
So, itis called the stalk of the brain. Medulla oblongata controls various reflexes
like breathing, swallowing, heart beat etc.

Task: Look at the chart and draw the figure of brain. Write the function of
different parts besides the located part of the picture.

Lesson 8-10 : Spinal cord

The spinal cord is protected by vertebral column. In spinal cord the
positions of grey matter and white matter are reversed i.e., grey matter
inside and white matter outside. A large number of nerve fibres (sensory
and motor) ascend or descend along the white matter of the spinal cord.

Brain

Spinal

Reflex action

What will you do when a mosquito sits on your hand’? You must try
to kill the mosquito. How do you feel that mosquito is on your
hand? You feel mosquito bite, so you do so. You feel mosquito bite
through nerve impulse and your response to this stimulus is also due to
nerve impulse. The mirror reflects light instantly when it receives light, reflex action

is also like that.

ée fey
Fig, 5.5; Human oervous
aysiem

2025
2025

Co-ordination and Secretion 33

Reflex action is the consequences of immediate action of nerve impulse. What
is the nerve impulse? Information, in the form of electrical impulses, flows
through the nerve cell is called the nerve impulse. When a mosquito sits on our
hand, we drive it away or when a pin pricks our hand or feet we withdraw our
hand or feet immediately. How it happens? The presence of mosquito on the
hand stimulates a sense organ. This sensation travels from the sense organ to the
spinal cord through sensory nerve fibres. In response, the central nervous
system sends back a message through motor nerve fibres to the muscle of hand
and as a result we drive away or lall the mosquito.

Reflex action occurs automatically (spontaneously) without conscious thought.
It may be defined as the inborn, automatic actions of the body which are done
without the involvement of thinking or brain. Thus these actions are immediate
and spontaneous and may be described as automatic response to stimuli. Reflex
actions are usually conveyed through spinal cord by a path called reflex arc. A
reflex are has the following constituents: (1) receptor (sensory organ) (2)
sensory (afferent) nerve (3) intemeurones (4) motor (efferent) nerve and (5)
effector organ.

Sensory mer
Central canal - Eee
Grey matter wis
White matter — BS ay

x Skin (receptor organ?

t Motor nerve yA
Spinal Cord . Voluntary muscle

Fig. 5.6: A reflex are of human body —_(effectro organ}

Explanation: Immediately after the pin pricks the skin of our hand, the sensory
organ (receptor) perceives the stimuli of pain; this painful stimuli passes into the
spinal cord through sensory (spinal) nerves; intemeurous transmits the impulse
from afferent neurones to efferent neurones; the motor nerve carries the message
from spinal cord to the muscles; the effector organ shows response to the stimuli
and consequently muscle contracts and we withdraw our hand from painful
stimul.

It is very important to realize that figure 5.6 is a greatly simplified picture of a
reflex action. In a reflex action, first a sense organ is stimulated by a pin prick.
This sensation travels from the sense organ to the spinal cord through the afferent
or sensory nerve fibers. In response, the central nervous system sends back a
message through the efferent or motor nerve fibers to the muscle of the organ and
as a result, the organ is withdrawn.
54 Science.

Apparently the simple reflex action is in fact very complex events. The nerve
fibres conduct impulses from the sensory side of a reflex arc to the brain, and
other fibres conduct impulses from the brain to the opposite side of the spinal
cord. These connections with the brain enable a person to be aware of certain
spinal reflexes and up to a point, exert control over them. Reflex action is a
combined act. In absence of any of the five parts, which makes reflex action
effective, it cannot work properly.

Task: What will you do if a pin pricks your hand or if you touch a hot
chimney of a lantern (Hurricane)? Why do you do so? How do you do so?
Explain it with a diagram.

Lesson 11- 12 : Excretory system

Through nose we take and expel air. We sweat during excess
heat. These are all excretory products. What is an excretory
product? Excretory products are those substances which are

harmful and unwanted for the body. Excretion is the process by Vay saan

which organism removes harmful, unwanted waste products ‘ia Renal aceries

from the body. Water, carbon dioxide, urea etc. are the waste a | Dorsal eovta
ay SA <——— Lrever

products of metabolism of human. The regular removal of these
waste products are necessary because, if they are accumulated,
they would affect the melabolic activities. Moreover, they are Urinary bladder
toxic and their retention in the body may cause intoxication Uretbes

and even death of the organism. These waste products are Fig, 5.7; Excretory System
expelled from the body mainly through expelled air, sweat and

urine. Lung, skin and kidney are the three main organs of excretion. Lung eliminates
carbon dioxide and skin eliminates harmful salt substance from the body. The liquid
mtrogenous waste products of the body are excreted through kidney.

Waste products from the body are removed by kidney, skin and lungs. 80% of the
total nitrogenous excretory products are eliminated as urine from the body. So,
kidney is termed as the main excretory organ of the body. The system which
performs the function of excretion is called excretory system.

Activity ; Observing the presence of carbon dioxide in breath.
Requirements : Test tube, glass/plastic pipe, lime water

Method : Take some clear lime water in a test tube. Put a plastic pipe or glass pipe in to
the test tube. Now blow air through the pipe. Observe what happens. After blowing air for
sometime, you will see that the lime water becomes turbid. Why it happens?

We know, carbon dioxide make lime water turbid. From this experiment it is proved that
the air we breathe out contains carbon dioxide.

2025
=
S
wy

Co-ordination and Secretion 35

A small/tiny amount of carbon dioxide is not injurious to health. But a large
amount of carbon dioxide is toxic, which is injurious to body. Our body cell
produces this gas as by product, during respiration. Blood carries carbon dioxide
from cells to lung. The exhaled (breathing out) air contains 4% carbon dioxide.
It also contains water vapour and carbon dioxide.

Activity : Observing the presence of water vapour in breath.

Requirements : A piece of glass or a mirror

Method: Ina winter morning keep your mouth in front of a glass plate or mirror and
exhale air through mouth (not nose). What do you see on the glass? The exhaled air
contains carbon dioxide and water vapour, The water vapour produces water droplets
on the cold glass and the mirror or glass plate becomes rather turbid and somewhat
opaque. After sometimes water droplets evaporate from the mirror and the mirror
becomes transparent again.

We see from this, the exhaled air contains water vapour.

Sweat

The outer layer of human body is known as integument or skin, Skin bears
numerous tiny pores. These are hair follicles. Sweat comes out through this hair
follicle. Sweat contains water, salt and a small amount of carbon dioxide,
Besides, there are some other harmful or useless substances in the sweat.
Urine

Kidney is termed as the factory of urine production. They lie at the back of the
abdominal cavity, one on each side of the vertebral column just below the
diaphragm. Kidney acts as filter. During the breakdown of excess amino acids
in the liver, nitrogenous waste products like ammonia, urea and uric acid are
formed. These are harmful for the body. The kidney extract these harmful

substance from blood, and excrete it from the body as part of a liquid called
urine. Urine is a transparent, pale-yellow coloured aqueous fluid.

Urine is retained in the urinary bladder for a particular period of time. During
filling of the urine, the urinary bladder expands. When sufficient pressure is
mounted inside the bladder, a spontaneous nervous activity (reflex) is initiated
so that the smooth muscles of the bladder wall contract and the urethral
sphincters are relaxed. As a result, the urine flows out from the bladder through
the urethra.

New words: Auxin, hormone, gibberellin, ethylene, cytokinin, neurone, axon,
dendrite, synapse, cerebrum, grey matter, white matter, pons, medulla,
oblongata, motor nerve, sensory nerve, reflex arc, reflex action
36 Science,

bide we have learned at the end of this chapter
Centriole is absent in neurone.

- The structure of neurone is different from those of the somatic cell.

-  Ajunction between the two neurones where axon of one nerve cell ends and
the dendron of another nerve cell arise is known as synapse. Nerve cell
transmits impulse from one nerve to another through this synapse.

- The grey matter of cerebrum has many layers of nerve cells. These nerve
cells form clusters at different regions and places of cerebrum. These
clusters of nerve cells are called nerve centre.

- In the spinal cord, grey matter forms the central core while white matter
forms the outer layer.

- Head, lung, secretory gland etc. are maintained and controlled by the
autonomic nervous system.

Exercise
Short Answer Questions

1. Describe the importance of hormone,
2. Mention the function of auxin and gibberellin.

3. Explain reflex action.

4. Describe the function of kidney.

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Which one of the following helps flowering (blooming)?
a. Gibberellin b.  Cytokinine
c. Florigen d. Auxin

2. Which organ of the human body plays the key role in eliminating
nitrogenous waste products?
a. Kidney b. Skin
c. Nose d. Anus

2025
Co-ordination and Secretion 57

Read the following paragraph and answer questions no. 3 and 4

Proma planted a money plant in a tub near the window of her room. As the plant
grows fast, the twigs and tendrils bend towards the window. She brought the
vine inside the room but the same thing happened again.

3. Why does Proma's money plant creep towards the window?

a, Air b. Water vapour
c. Light d. Heat
4. Enhances the growth of Proma's money plant-
i. Gibberellin
ii, Auxin
iii. Ethylene
Which one of the following is correct?
a 1 b. 1 & ti
c. u& iti d. iii & iti

Creative Questions

1 Trangmition of impulse _

(o \Sey, ows oa
3 Saae

What is hormone?

Explain the role of auxin in plants.

Explain the position of the above cell in cerebrum.

What are the importance of the above cell in transmitting impulses in

human body? Explain.

2. Apu was drawing the picture of the unit of nervous system, attentively. At
that time his sister Kanta poked him with her elbow from behind. Apu
caught hold of Kanta's hand without seeing her. Then Apu told Kanta there
is a relationship between his drawing and the catching of her hand.

Pon a

What is the main excretory organ of human body?

What do you mean by tropic movement.

Describe the structure that Apu was drawing.

How is the ability of catching Kanta's hand related to the nervous
process of Apu's body? Explain.

ee op

Do yourself

1. Why do you close your eyes when a light falls upon them? Explain with
reasons.

2. Cut a twig of a patabahar plant. Observe it for a few days. Explain what
happened and why it happened so?

Forma-8- Science, Class-&
