Chapter One
Classification of Animal World

The world is inhabited by numerous diverse small and large animals. There are
various similarities and dissimilarities among them. From microscopic Amoeba to
the gigantic whale, all are included in this diverse world of animals. The variety of
animal depends on the diversity of environment. The variety of animals takes
place due to verity of environment and habitat. It is a difficult task to understand
the vast animal kingdom. To understand the animal world easily a systematic
atrangement and grouping is necessary. The method of this systematic
grouping/arrangement is called classification. Classification makes the way easy
to understand animal kingdom

At the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e classify invertebrate animals;
« classify vertebrate animals;
® explain the necessity of classification of the living world.
Lesson 1: Classification of animal world
‘You can see various types of animals — small and large around you. Try yourself
to answer the questions below, from the knowledge you have acquired in class six.

Questions:
1. Do all the animals you see look alike?
2. Do all of them have vertebral columm?
3. Do they live in same habitat?
4. Do all of them take same food?
5. Do all of them have similar types of locomotion?

Now match your thoughts to the answers below. The animals which we see
around us are not all alike. Their shape, structure as well as other physiological
activities are also different. Some have vertebral column and some do not have.

Forma-|- Science, Class-8
2 Science

Some of them live on land, some in water and some on trees. Their food is also of
different kinds. These animals use different organs like fins, legs, wings, cilia and
appendages for their movements. There are some animals who are sessile in form.

We do not have sufficient knowledge about the exact number of such diverse
animals in the world. So far about 1.5 million species of animals have been
discovered and the number is increasing day by day. Classification is an easy way
io know the structure and nature of such huge number of animals. Morphological
characteristics of the animal, similarity and dissimilarity among them and their
interrelationship are the basis of classification. Depending on their
characteristics they are grouped into different taxon serially. This step-wise
grouping of the living world is known as classification. With the growing need of
time, taxonomy has become a separate branch of Biology.

Species is the lowest rank of the taxonomic unit. Por example; man, pigeon, toad
etc. are separate species. To classify an animal, it is arranged step by considering
its indigenous characteristics.

Aristotle, John Ray and Carolus Linnaeus are the notable names in the history of
classification. Naturalist Carolus Linnaeus is called the father of taxonomy. In
the naming of animals, he introduced bmomial nomenclature and defined genus
and species. Scientific name of an animal, contains two parts. The process of
such naming is called binomial or scientific name. For example, Home sapiens is
the scientific name of human. Scientific name must be in Latin or Latinized
language or in English.

Draw the following chart in your notebook and now fill in the gaps.

Name of Animal Habitat Structure Usefulness Harmfulness
Monkey
Earthworm

/ Mussel
Bird
Fish

Lesson 2-5 : Classification of invertebrate animals

In the modern classification, all animals belong to the Kingdom Animalia. In this
classification, previously known phylum Protozoa is considered as a sub kingdom.

There are total 33 phyla of animals in Animalia world, Among these, nine phyla
are called major phyla based on the number of species. The rest are non-major
phyla. Animals in the first eight of these nine phyla are invertebrates and
animals in the last phylum are vertebrates.

2025
2025

Classification of Animal World 3

Ata glance the classification of the major phyla of Animalia world.

Phylum

> Porifera

> Cinidaria Class

> Platyhelminthes —> Cyclostomata
ikiasiocé > Nematoda > Chondrichthyes

| gle Annelida > Osteichthyes

Animalia | Arthropoda Sub Phylum —> Amphibia

+> Mollusca Urochordata +> Reptilia

+> Echinodermata Cephalochordata > Aves

—> Chordata Vertebrata ——————>+-> Mammalia

1. Phylum-Porifera

Habit and habitat: The word porus means hole and the word Ferre means to
bear. The word porifera is derived from these two words.The member of the
phylum porifera is commonly known as ‘Sponge’. Their distribution is
worldwide i.e. they are found all over the world. Most of the species are marine.
But some live in fresh water. Usually they live in colonies.

General characteristics

® Simplest multicellular animal.
Though they are multicellular, they do not
form tissue,

® = Body wall with numerous pores. Through these
pores food and oxygen enter into the body.

® No compact tissue, organ and organ system.

Fig. 1.1: Spongilla

Example : Spongilla, Scypha.
2. Phylum-Cnidaria This phylum is named from Cnidocyte, a cell of special
characteristics. Phylum previously known as Coelenterata.

Habit and habitat: Members of this phylum are present in almost all the
regions of the world, They are mostly marine. Many species found in canals,
beels, rivers, lakes, fountains, ete. They are diverse in shape. size and colour.
Some species live alone (solitary) and some live in groups forming colonies.
They attach themselves to floating logs, leaves or other substance or move freely
i.e. can swim freely.
4 Science

General characteristics
® Body consists of two embryonic layers. The outer one
is ectoderm and the inner one is endoderm.

® Body cavity is known as coelenteron. It helps in digestion
and circulation.

® Ectoderm bears a special type of cells called cnidocyte.
These cells help in locomotion, defense, capture of prey.

Example : Hydra, Obelia.

Fig. 1.2: Hydra
3. Phylum-Platyhelminthes

Habit and habitat: The word Platy means flat and helminthes means worm.
The word Platyhelminthes is derived these two words. The life style of the
member of this phylum is very colourful. Many species live on other organism
as ecto-parasite (outside the body) or endo-parasite (inside the body). Some free
living species live in fresh or saline water. Some animals of this phylum live in
wet and damp soil. Fasciola and Taenia are under this Phylum.

General characteristics

Body flat, bisexual and mostly parasitic.
Eecto-parasite or endo-parasite.

Body covered with thick cuticle.

Body bears sucker and hooks.

Flame cell present and acting as excretory organ.
Digestive system is incomplete or absent.
Example : Fasciola, Taenia

Fig.1.3:a)Fasciola b) Taenia

4, Phylum - Nematoda (Also called Nemathelminthes)

Habit and habitat: The word Nema means thread. This Phylum is named after
this word. Many animals of this phylum are endo-parasite and live in the
intestine and blood. These parasitic animals living in human body and animals
cause harm to them. On the other hand, many are free living animals they live in
water and soil. Ascaris, Wuchereria and Loa loa are under this phylum.

2025
2025

Classification of Animal World 5

General characteristics f
Body tubular (cylindrical) and covered with thick skin. I}
Digestive system complete. Mouth and anus present. Hi
Respiratory and circulatory system absent. HH |
Generally unisexual. WA #
Body cavity without lining and true coelom absent. = i

Example: Ascaris, Loaloa. AS
+

5. Phylum - Annelida Fig. 14: Ascaris
Habit and habitat: The word Annulus means ring, This phylum is named after
this word, Annelids are found in almost all temperate and tropical regions of the
world. Many species live in damp soil, fresh water and some live in deep sea
water, A few species drag their burrows in stone and soil to live there.
General characteristics
® Body tubular and segmented. a
e Each segment contains setae that helps in a
locomotion (exception -no setae in leeches).
® Nephridia present as excretory system.
Example : Earthworm, Leech.
6. Phylum - Arthropoda

Habit and habitat: The word Arthro means joint and Poddos means leg. This
phylum is named after these two words. Arthropoda is the largest phylum of the
animal kingdom. They can live everywhere and in every environment around
the globe. Many species of them live as endo-parasite and ecto-parasite. Many
of them can survive on land, in fresh water and in brakish (salty) sea water.
Many species of this phylum can fly with the help of wings.

Fig. 1.5 : a) Earthworm, b) Leech

General characteristics

® In the body there are sub organs divided and jointed
into three regions- head, thorax and abdomen.
Head bears a pair of compound eyes and antenna.
Soft body is covered with hard chitinous exoskeleton.
There is an excretory organ called Malpighian ducts.

Body cavity filled with blood and is known as haemocoel.
Example: Butterfly, prawn, cockroach, crab,

in b its
Fig. 1.4:a) Cockroach b) Butterfly
6 Science

7. Phylum- Mollusea

Habit and habitat: This phylum is named after the word Mollusecus which

means soft. This is the second largest phylum of animal world. The members of

this phylum show diversity in their body form, habit and habitat. They live in

almost all environment of the world. They are mostly marine and live in

different zones of the sea. Some species live in hills and forest, while some live

in fresh water

General characteristics

® Soft body, usually covered with hard shell.

® Muscular foot used for locomotion.

® Gaseous exchange (Respiration) takes place
by lungs or gills.

Example : Snail, Mussel.
8. Phylum: Echinodermata

Habit and habitat: The word Echinos means thorn and derma means skin. This
phylum is named after these words. Echinoderms are all marine. They occur in
all oceans of the world and at all depths. None of the members is found on land
and in fresh water. Most of them live indepenently.

Fig. 1.7 : Snail

General characteristics

® Dermal skin bears spine.

® Body is divided into five equal parts (i.e. pentamerous).

® A unique water-vascular system is present and
locomotion is done by tube feet.

® No distinct head, dorsal and ventral surface in adults.

Example : Starfish, Sea cucumber. Fig. 1.8 : Starfish

Lesson 6-8 : Classification of vertebrate animals

9, Phylum - Chordata

Habit and habitat: The word Chordata originates from chorda which means
cord or duct. Chordate lives in all sorts of environment of the world. Many
species are terrestrial in habit. Among aquatic chordates, many species live mn
fresh water or in ocean. Many species are arboreal, desert dweller, polar,
cave-dwelling and flying in nature. There are many ectoparasitic chordate
species which live on the bodies of other animals.

2025
2025

Classification of Animal World 7

General characteristics

® The notochord is a rod-like unsegmented. semirigid structure. It forms a
stiffening body axis throughout life or at some stage in the life cycle of each
chordate.

® Single, dorsal, tubular nerve cord remain present in surface.

® Pharyngeal pouches (gill slits) present throughout life or at some stages in the
life cycle.

Example : Man, Toad, Carp (Rui) fish.

Phylum chordata is divided into three sub-phylum. Such as-
(a) Urochordata
General characteristics

® Notochord present only in larval stage and restricted
to the tail.

@ Gill slits and dorsal tubular nerve cord present only
in the early stage of the life cycle.

Example : Ascidia, Salpa.
(b) Cephalochordata

@ Notochord and nerve cord found along the entire
length of body and persist throughout life.

® Looking like fish,

Example: Branchiostoma

(c) Vertebrata

The member of this sub-phylum is known as vertebrate. Notochord is present
only in embryonic stage and replaced by vertebral column in adults. Depending
on structure and other characteristics, this sub-phylum is divided into seven
classes.

Fig. 1.10: Branchiostoma

(I) Class-Cyclostomata

* Body Slender, eel-like, rounded with naked
skin,

* Fish like in form,

* True jaws and paired appendages absent. Fig. 1.11 : Petromyzon

Science

Respiration by gills.

Example : Petromyzon.
(0) Class-Chondrichthyes

General characteristics

All marine.

Cartilaginous skeleton. The orifice is situated in the digitate portion of the body.
Skin with placoid scales; 5-7 pairs
of gills are present on both side of
the head.

Streamlined body with heterocercal Fig. 1.12 : Harmer fish

tail but no operculum. The two parts of tail are of different shape that means

heterocircle.

Example: Shark, Sword fish.
(11) Class-Osteichthyes

General characteristics

Mostly fresh water fish, >=
The orifice is at the front side of the body. _

Skin with cycloid, ctenoid or ganoid Fig. 1.13 : Hilsa fish
scales: oe without scale. . Task: Collect Lottta, Rupchanda, Poa,
Respiration primarily by gills. Four pair | Coral, Pabda, Shing (cat fish) and
of gills are present on both side of the | Magur (Cat fish). In which class do they
head. Gills are covered by operculum, _|_ belong? Identify their characteristics.
Both parts of the tail are similar. That is homocircle.

Example: Hilsa fish, Sea horse,

(IV) Class-Amphibia

These animals can live under water breathing through their skin, but when on
land they breathe by lungs. They lay their eggs in water and these hatch into

larvae which breathe by gills.
General characteristics

Skin without scales.

Skin thin, soft, moist and with many glands.
Amphibians are cold-blooded animals.

Lay eggs in water. A tadpole hatches from
the fertilized egg.

Fig. 1.14: Toad

Example : Frog, Toad.

2025
Classification of Animal World

(V) Class-Reptilia

General characteristics

Skin dry and with scales.
They move by crawling. :
Each of the four legs contains five toes (claws); Pig. cay: Wall lizard 7

absent in snakes and some lizards. od

Example: Wall lizard, Crocodile, Snake.
(VI) Class-Aves
General characteristics

Body is covered with feather.

Two wings, two legs and one beak.

The presence of air sacs with lung helps in flight. Wi

All birds are warm blooded. Fig. 1.6 : Magpie { Doel)

Bones are light, strong, delicate and laced with air cavities.

Example : Crow, Duck. Magpie.

(VII) Class-Mammalia

General characteristics

Body covered with hair.

Female mammal suckle their young on
milk from mammary glands.

Wann blooded animal
Four-chambered heart.

Teeth heterodont (Varying in structure

and function).

All the mammal give birth to child. Example : Man, Camel, Royal Bengal
Tiger. But their are some exception like Platypus

There are different types of gland in the skin.

Fig. 1.17 : Royal Bengal Tiger

Task: Make a group of five. Now, observe the chart of vertebrate. and invertebrate
animals; identify and note down their characteristics. Now present it to your class. Match
the similarity of your findings with those of the other groups.

Forma-2- Science, Class-8

10 Science,

Lesson 9 : Necessity of classification

The unit of classification is called taxon. Taxon helps to classify the vast animal
world. The seven major taxa are as follows: Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order,
Family, Genus and Species. To identify an animal, taxonomists should match
the characteristics of the animals with the above mentioned seven taxa. Sub-phylum
is usually added under phylum.

Classification is a scientific approach by which we can gather knowledge about
different plants and animals easily. It saves labour, money and time.
Classification is essential to identify any animal including the newly discovered
one. Interrelationship between different animals can be determined with the help
of classification, We can determine the systematic position of the organisms
according to the evolutionary trend. Organisms can be arranged into different
taxa by following definite rule. This also allows us to trace the affinity of one
group of organism to other. It is useful to determine the collective and systematic
knowledge about organisms. For example, all acellular (Unicellular) animals are
grouped under one phylum and all multicellular animals under nine phylum.

New words: Taxonomy, binomial nomenclature, species, animalia, coelom,
coelenteron, setae, notochord, larva, cycloid, ganoid.

What we have learned at the end of this chapter

Vertebrata are advanced Animals. Their notochord is replaced by vertebral
column consisting of hard vertebrae.

- Respiration by gills in aquatic vertebrate and by lungs in land vertebrate.

— Chordata is a phylum under the kingdom Animalia. Animals having
notochord, nerve cord and pharyngeal gill slits are known as chordates.

— Anterior part of the nerve cord is swollen and transformed into brain. The
skull houses the brain and protect it.

— Cellular layers of embryo that give rise to different organs are known as germ
layer.

— Mantle covers the soft body of molluscs. They use their muscular foot for
locomotion.

2025
2025

Classification of Animal World i
~ Radial symmetry applies to those forms that can be divided into similar halves
by more than two planes passing through one main axis. Exansple-Starlish.

= cauiy surrounded by body wall is known as coelenteron. It acts as digestive
as well as circulatory system.

- The space filled with fluid between body wall and the alimentary canal of
multicellular animal is known as coelom.

-~ Haemocoel is filled with blood and acts as a part of circulatory system.

— Arthropoda is the largest phylum of the animal kingdom. Harmful insects are
known as pest.

Exercise
Fill in the blanks

1. Excretory system of liver fluke is

2. Blood filled body cavity of prawn is known as

3 use muscular foot for locomotion.

4. Members of the sub-phylum are known as vertebrate.

5. Members of the sub-phylum Urochordata have in their tail.

Short Answer Questions

1. How many parts are there in binomial nomenclature of an animal ?
Mention the name of these parts. What is the scientific name of human?

2. Write the names of five known arthropods.

Which phylum does prawn belong to? What are the characteristies of this

phylum.

4. Mention the characteristics of mammals.

5. What are the characteristics of Urochordata ?

my

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Which animal belongs to the phylum Mollusca?
a. Crab b. Leech
c. Starfish d. Mussel
12 Science,

2. Both Scypha and Hydra are-
i. Diploblastic

ii. Multicellular

ii. Devoid of well developed organ system.

Which one of the following is correct?
a té&il b 1& in

ec ué&in d. iu & iti

Based on the chart below, answer questions no. 3 & 4

m Animal having wing and haemocoel.

n Animal having feather and air sacs with lung

0 Cold-blooded animal and lays eggs
) Animals with scale and paired fins

3. Which animal of the chart is invertebrate?

a om b on
co d. p
4, Can fly-

i. = m&nanimal
ii, o&o animal
iii, m & p animal
Which one of the following is correct?
a. i b. i & ii

ce 1& iil d. iu & ili

2025
Classification of Animal World se

Creative Questions

1.

a.
b.
Gs.
d.

What is classification?
What do you mean by scientific name?
In which class animal 'P' belongs to ? Explain.

Explain why these two animals belong to different classes.

2. Rahat caught a mosquito just after being bitten. He examined its
appendages, eye and body covering with the help of a magnifying glass.
Then he tried to understand its systematic position im light of his textbook
knowledge.

In which phylum tape worm belongs to?

b. Explain the position of notochord in human body.
c. Based on Rahat's observation, explain the systematic position of the
animal.
d, Why it is important for Rahat to know the systematic position of the
animal? Explain.
Do it yourself

1. Collect some vertebrate animals from your environment/locality and write
down their characteristics.

2. Mention the phylum of the following animals - earthworm, prawn,
grasshopper, snail, mussel, rut fish and magpie-robin (Doel). Make a list of
their identifying characteristics.

2025
