Chapter Two
Cells and Tissues of Organisms

You have already learned the concept of biological cell in your previous classes.
Now, based on those ideas, you will learn more about it. Do the views of a cell
of an organism appear the same under both a light microscope and an electron
microscope? In this chapter, you will find the answers to these kinds of
questions.

PN25
® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to—

* explain the functions of main organelles of plant and animal cells:
* compare a plant cell and an animal cell;

« describe the roles of different types of cell in performing the functions of
nerve, muscles, blood, skin and bones:

* evaluate the appropriateness of cell in the body of an organism;

* explain plant tissues;

* explain animal tissues:

- evaluate the functions of tissue on the basis of grouping the similar type of
cells and performing the same action;

* explain the organisation of cells in tissue, organs and organ systems;

- explain the functions of tissue system;

* explain the concept and importance of organs and organ systems;

* draw and label diagrams of plant cell (onion cell) and animal cell (buccal mucosa
cell) after observing them under a microscope;

« draw and label diagrams of plant and animal tissue;

* correctly use a microscope;

+ understand the roles of cells in different activities of organisms.

2.1 Living Cell

You learned in your previous classes that the cell is the structural unit of an
organism. What is a living cell? Some scientists describe-a living cell as the unit
of structure and biological function of an organism. In 1969 Loey and Siekevitz
described a cell, surrounded by a selectively permeable membrane, as the unit of
living activity, which can exactly duplicate itself without any different living
medium.

Forma-03, Biology Class-9-10
Types of Cells

All living cells are not the same. Just as they haye differences in structure, they
also have differences in size, shape and function. On the basis of the organisation
of the nucleus, cells can be divided into two types- prokaryotic cell and
eukaryotic cell,

a) Prokaryotic cell

A prokaryotic cell does not contain a true nucleus. This is why it is called a cell
with a primitive type of nucleus. The term nucleotide fits nicely in this case.
Nuclear materials in a prokaryotic cell are not surrounded by a nuclear
membrane. They are dispersed in its cytoplasm. Though the cell organelles such
as mitochondria, plastids. endoplasmic reticulum etc. are not found in a
prokaryotic cell, ribosomes are present in il. The chromosomal structure of a
prokaryotic cell consists only of unwrapped DNA. Blue green algae and bacteria
are constituted of this type of cell.

b) Eukaryotic cell

In this type of cell, the nucleus is well structured, meaning that nuclear materials
are well organised and surrounded by a nuclear membrane. Other cell organelles,
along with ribosome, are present. Chromosomes consist of DNA, histone,
protein and other components. Most living cells are of this type.

On the basis of function, there are two types of cells: somatic cell and gametic
cell.

i) Somatic cell: This type of cell takes part in the composition of the body of an
organism. Somatic cells divide through the process of binary fission and mitotic
division. Organisms grow in this way. Moreover, these cells take part in the
organisation of different organs and organ systems.

ii) Gametic cell: Gametic cells are produced in the organisms in which sexual
reproduction and alternation of generations occur. Primordial germ cells divide
through meiotic division and produce gametic cells. In a gametic cell, the
number of chromosomes becomes half of its somatic type. A new living
body is commenced afier the fusion of male and female gametes. Zygote is the
first cell produced after the union of male and female gametic cells. Zygote
undergoes repeated mitotic division to organise a body of an organism.

2025
£23

2.2 Main Organelles of Plant and Animal Cells and their Functions

All higher plants and animals are eukaryotic. Each cell consists of many
organelles. Although most of the organelles are found in both plants and animals,
there are some organelles found only in plants or in animals.

Now you will have some ideas about some cell organelles which can be seen by
electron microscope.

~~ Plasma membrane

—— Cytoplasmic matrix

_—~ Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
Rough endoplagmie reticulum

~ Nurleopore

el | AN. Noceots
Cell vacuole — : iy i Nacleer membrune | Nucleus
Chromagn
Nocleoplasm
Inter cellular space
Golgi body
Mitochoadna
Chloroplast
Lyeome

— Golgi body

i —— Cenmrosome
_)-—_ Nuclear membrane
———— Nudleupore
—— Nocleolvs

—— Chromatin
“—— Nueleoplasm

Nucleus

——

\__. Endoplasmic reticelom (rough)

a = Lysogame
*~Vacuole

Figure 2.02 : Different parts of a typical animal cell
Cell wall: Cell wall is a unique feature of a plant cell. It is composed of inert
materials. There is no cell wall in an animal cell. The chemical composition of
a cell wall is complex. Cellulose, hemicelluloses, lignin, pectin, suberin are the
chemical components of a plant cell wall. A bacterial cell wall is composed of
protein, lipid and poly saccharide. A fungal cell wall is made up of chitin, The
primary cell wall is single layered. The secondary cell wall gradually develops
through the compilation of different chemical substances secreted from
protoplasm on the middle Jamellum. At the time of the development of the
secondary cell wall, cavities are formed called pits.

These pits give a cell its
rigidity. The Cell wall retains
the shape and size of a cell.
Plasmodesmata are formed in
the cell wall to exchange
materials with adjacent cells.

Jiddie layer) Three layered poe Teo
Enner layer = Sécoadary well

The cell wall controls the (A) Transverse section (B) Longitudinal section
movement of water and Figure:2.03 Microscepic structure of cell wall
minerals.

Protoplasm: The translucent, semi fluid, viscous substance that constitutes the
interior matter of a living cell is called protoplasm. Everything surrounded by the
cell wall is protoplasm. Even plasmalemma is a part of it. Protoplasm also
contains cytoplasmic organelles and nucleus.

2.2.1 Plasmalemma: The double layered
membrane around the protoplasm of a cell
is called cell membrane or plasmalemma
or plasmamembrane. This membrane is very
flexible. The foldings of a cell membrane
are called microvilli, which are mainly
composed of lipids and proteins. Because
it is selectively permeable, the membrane
can control the movement of water and
minerals through the process of osmosis, =

and separates a cell from its neighbourmg = Figure:2.04 Cell membrane
cells,

Microvilli

2025
2025

2.2.2 Cytoplasmic organelles: The semi fluid, jelly like substance of a cell that
is external to the nuclear membrane and internal to the cellular membrane is called
the cytoplasm. The Cytoplasm contains many organelles. Though they have
varying functions, they are also interdependent, Some of these organelles have
membranes whereas some don’t. These organelles are as follows:

Membrane-bound cytoplasmic organelles-

1. Mitochondria: Richard Altmann discovered this organ m 1886 but m others
opinion it was discovered in 1894 which takes part in respiration and gave the name
*Bioblast’, However Benda, a scientist gave the cuurent name ‘Mitochondria’. It is
surrounded by a double-layered membrane which is composed of phospholipid and
protein.

membrane

Cristae Sete to ae - j— Cristas
Oxysome Ses te
=;—— Oneysome
DMA
Ribosome Matrix

Figure:2.05 (A) Mitochondria  (B) Longitudinal section

The inner membrane has infoldings like finger called cristae. These foldings are
studded with small round bodies known as oxysomes. The oxysomes contain
enzymes. The space enclosed by the inner membrane is the matrix. The main
function of mitochondria is to help the organism in cellular respiration. You will
later learn that the process of respiration has four stages: glycolysis, Acetyl-CoA
formation, the Kreb's cycle and electron transport system. The reactions of the
first phase i.e glycolysis do not occur in mitochondria. But the reactions of the
second, third (most important Kreb's cycle stage) and fourth stages are
performed in mitochondria. As all the necessary enzymes are present in
mitochondria, so all the reaction of Kreb's cycle occur there. Maximum energy
is produced in Kreb's cycle. This is why a mitochondrion (singular) is called 'the
power house’ of a cell.
An organism uses this energy to perform different functions. With some
exceptions, mitochondria are found in all plant and animal cells. Mitochondria
aré not present in Prokaryotic cells. Some Eukaryotic cells (for example,
protozoa like Trichomonus, Monocercomonoides etc.) do not contain
mitochondria. It can be assumed that in course of history of evolution,
mitochondria or its previous form somehow entered eukaryotic cells and then
became a permanent organelle of the cell. From the data collected so far, this
explanation seems to be acceptable.

2. Plastid: A plastid is an important organelle for a plant cell. In 1866 scientist
Emst Hackle discovered plastid. The main functions of a plastid are to produce
and store food, and cause the appealing and colourful appearance of flowers,
fruits and leaves of a plant. Flowers with appealing colours helps pollinate
plants. There are three categories of plastids: chloroplast, chromoplast and
leucoplast.

a) Chloroplast: Green plastids are called chloroplasts. They are found in the
cells of leaves, young stems and other green parts of a plant. The grana of a
plastid capture solar energy and convert it into chemical energy. With the help
of enzymes in stroma this solar energy helps to produce simple carbohydrates
from cellular water and carbon dioxide taken from air. This type of plastid looks
green because it has chlorophyll. Carotenoids are also present in them,

Outer Layer

Thyllakoid ff
Middle of thylakoid

Figure : 2.06 A Plastid (Segment). Different Parts of
chloroplast (Under electron microscope and simplified)
b) Chremoplast: Chromoplasts are coloured, but are not green. The photosynthetic
pigments xanthophyll (yellow), carotene (orange), phycoerythrin (red),
phycocyanin (blue) etc. are present in them, and so some of them are yellow, some

2023
ey
3
my

are blue and others are red. The flowers, leaves and other parts of a plant have
their attractive colourful appearance because of these pigments. They are found in
coloured flower, leave and carrot root. Their main purpose is to make flowers
attractive for pollination. They also synthesize and store different types of
photosynthetic pigments.

ec) Leucoplast: In contrast to other plastids, leucoplasts are non-pigmented.
They are usually found in the cells of the plant parts where sunlight does not
reach; for example, root, gamets and embryo. Their main function is the
storage of food. Leucoplasts can be transformed into chromoplasts or
chloroplasts when they come in contact with sunlight.

Activity: Draw diagrams of plastids.
Essentials: Poster paper, sign pen and a picture of different categories of
plastids.

Procedure: After drawing a diagram of different types of plastids, present
. it to the students in the classroom.

3. Golgi body: Golgi body is mainly found Cisternae Large Vesicle

within the cytoplasm of animal cells. But
plant cell also contain golgi body. It is
composed of stacks of membrane-bound
structures known as cisternae and vesicles.
Hydrolysis of enzymes take place in its
membrane. It is involve in the secretion of
some hormones and other substances in a

living cell. It also plays important roles in
many metabolic activities, Sometimes, the
golgi body stores protein. Figure : 2.07 Golgi Body

Small Vesicle

4. Endoplasmic reticulum: Ribosomes are studded with the cytoplasmic side
ofrough endoplasmic reticulum, and so proteins are synthesized in these places.
Membrane bound vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum shutile proteins
and other materials produced in a cell. Sometimes the endoplasmic reticulum
stretches up to the cytoplasmic membrane, and thus it is assumed that enzymes
for other cells and other substances produced inside the cell are transported by
the endoplasmic reticulum. They also play a significant role in the development
of mitochondria, vacuole etc. in a cell. Endoplasmic reticulum is found in both
the plant.and animal cells.

§. Cell vacuole: The hollow space which can be seen in cytoplasm is called cell
vacuole. Large vacuole is a prime feature of a plant cell. [ts main function is to
contain cell sap. Different types of substances such as inorganic salt, protein,
carbohydrate, fat, organic acid, pigment, water etc. are found in a cell vacuole.
No vacuole is generally found in any animal cell. If present in any animal cell. it
usually is much smaller.

6. Lysosome : Lysosome protects cells from
germs. The lysosome enzyme kills germs.
These enzymes are protected by a membrane
so that other organelles do not get digested
when they come in contact with these
enzymes. The organelles adjacent to
lysosomes are digested if the membrane of Figure : 2/8 Lysosome granules
lysosome is destroyed due to oxygen

deficiency. The cell may even be destroyed.

Non-membranous cytoplasmic organelles-

1. Cytoskeleton: The cytoskeleton is a complex network of fibres that shapes the
cell and holds organelles in place. It is located just beneath the plasmalemma.
These fibres consist of a complex mesh of protem filaments. Actin, myosin and
tubulin are some of the proteins that are used to make the fibres, Microtubules,
microfilaments and intermediate filaments are some of the fibers in the
cytoskeleton.

2. Ribosome: Ribosomes are found in all living cells. They lack membrane
around them, and help in protein synthesis. The bondage in polypeptide chains
of proteins are carried out by ribosomes. They also provide enzymes needed for
the cell, Enzymes help to accelerate the speed of biochemical reactions. Note that
the matrix of the mitochondria and the stroma of the plastids also contain
ribosomes that participate in protein synthesis according to the signal from the
organelles’ own DNA, just as the ribosomes located in the cytoplasm of a
bacterial cell synthesize proteins for that cell. This is also evidence that these
two organelles once lived independently before becoming part of another cell in
the course of evolution,

f025
3. Centrosome: A centriole is a hollow, cylindrical organelle inside the
centrosome. The thick liquid surrounding the centriole is called centrosphere.

The centriole and centrosphere make up the
centrosome together, These are found in
most animal cells, but they are rarely found
in cells of lower plants. There are two
centriole in a centrosome. The centrioles in
a centrosome develop astral rays. and play
a significant role in constructing spindle
apparatus, They participate in the formation
of various types of flagella.

2.2.3 Nucleus: The nucleus is a membrane
bound prominent organelle found in
eukaryotic cells and carries chromosomes.
It is roughly round or spherical in structure.
Nucleus is not found in mature sieve cells
and red blood cells. The chromosomes of
the nucleus carry the heredity information
of the organism, and controls all the
activities of a cell. A structured nucleus has

the following parts:

Figure ; 2.09 Centrosome

Nuclear Membrane
Nucleopore

Figure : 2.10 Nucleus

a) Nuclear membrane: The membrane that encloses the nucleus is called nuclear
membrane. It is a double layered membrane, and is composed of lipids and
proteins. In this membrane, there are some pores called nucleopores. The nuclear
membrane controls the transport system from the nucleoplasm to the cytoplasm.
The membrane separates the contents of the nucleus from the cytoplasm.

b) Nucleoplasm: The jelly-like fluid enveloped by the nuclear membrane is
called the nucleoplasm. It is similar to the cytoplasm of a cell. It is a viscous fluid
which contains nucleic acids, proteins, enzymes and some other substances

dissolved in and mixed with it,

¢) Nucleolus: In a nucleus the round structure attached to a chormosome is called
the nucleolus, They are attached with that portion of chromosome which is
non-receiver of colour. This is composed of RNA and proteins. Its main function

is to store nucleic acid and synthesize protein.

Forma-04, Biology Class-9-10
d) Chromatin reticulum: Thread-like materials
are seen tangled in the nucleus of non-dividing
cells. These threads are chromatin. Chromatin
(also known as chromosomes in dividing cells)
is a complex structure composed of DNA and
proteins that acts as a medium for the
transmission of genetic characteristics. Just as it
is impossible to count the blades of a ceiling fan
in motion, it is impossible to count the number Chrowmatid
of chromatin filaments in a non-dividing
nucleus. The tangled chromatin filaments
together are called chromatin reticulum or nuclear reticulum. During cell
division, the tangles shorten slightly and the chromatin becomes thicker and
shorter. The chromatin of eukaryotic cells can then be characterized as separate
structures. Chromosomes are another name for the chromatin that becomes
thicker and shorter during cell division. It is best understood at the metaphase
stage of division. At metaphase, each chromosome divides to form a pair of
chromosomes whose lengthwise halves are called chromatids. At the (near)
center of the chromatid is a constricted region called the centromere. During cell
division, the part of the centromere where the microtubules of the spindle
apparatus attach is called the kinetochore. The two parts of the chromatid on
either side of the centromere are its two arms, At anaphase, when the chromatid
pairs separate along the centromere, each chromatid is considered a single
chromosome. You will know more about this in the third chapter.

@) ‘Individual Activity

Activity: Present the different organelles ofa cell discussed above in a chart.

Figure : 2.11 Chromosome

2.3 Roles of different cells in proper functioning of plants and animals

Tissue cell is the structural and functional unit of organisms. The functions of
unicellular and multicellular organisms are performed in different ways. From
the first day of the advent of world’s primitive animal protozoa performs all its
activities such as digestion, growth, reproduction in a single cell till today while
the multicellular organism has different organs for different metabolic activities.

2.3.1 Plant tissue

An ensemble of similar or different types of cells with the same origin and
performing a specific function is called tissue. Plant tissues are of two types;
Meristematic tissue and Permanent tissue, The cells of meristematic tissue are

iy
S

co
capable of cell division, but the cells of permanent tissue are not. Tissue can be
grouped into three types: simple tissue, complex tissue and excretory tissue. Here
we will discuss simple and complex tissues only.

Simple tissue: The permanent tissue which contains cells of the same shape, size and
structure, is called simple tissue. On the basis of the nature of cell, simple tissues are
divided into three types: 1) Parenchyma, 2) Collenchyma and 3) Sclerenchyma,

1) Parenchyma: Parenchyma cells are seen in almost every part of a plant. Cells
of this type are living, isodiametric, thin walled and turgid with protoplasm.
Intercellular space is found in parenchyma cells. The cells are thin walled, and
the walls are composed of cellulose. When chloroplasts are present in this type
of cells, they are called chlorenchyma. The parenchyma cells with air filled
spaces are called aerenchyma, and are usually big in size and found in aquatic
plants. The main functions of parenchyma cells are to organise the body or body
parts of plants to produce, transport and store food.

2) Collenchyma: Collenchyma tissues are a special type of parenchyma cell. The
walls of the cells become thick with the compilation of cellulose and pectin. Walls
of these polygonal cells are thickened unevenly, where the corners are thicker
due to pectin deposition. The cells are elongated, filled with protoplasm. Intercellular
spaces may be present. The borders of the cells may be triangular, slim or oblique.
Their main functions are to produce food and provide the plant with mechanical
support and rigidity. They are found in the veins and petioles of leaves. This
kind of tissue provides rigidity to the young and supple stems, for example, the
stems of Gourd (Cueurhita sp) and Leucas (Leveas lavandulifolia), The ones
that contain chloroplast produce food.

Cell wall
Cytoplasm

Figure- 2.12: Different types of simple tissue, A- Parenchyma,
B-Collenchyma, C-Sclerenchyma
3) Selerenchyma: Tissue composed of cells with the thickening of walls with
lignin for providing mechanical support is called sclerenchyma.
While in early stage of their development, sclerenchyma cells are alive, losing
the living protoplasm when they become mature. The main functions of
sclerenchyma lssue are to provide mechanical support and rigidity and to
conduct water and minerals. There are two types of sclerenchyma cells, fibers
and sclereids.

a) Fibers: They are elongated, slender, thick walled, and both their ends are
pointed or sometimes rounded. In their walls, they have pores called pits. Based
on their origin and structure, they are called by different names, such as, bast
fiber, surface fibre, xylem liber or wood fiber.

b) Sclereids: Because of their hardness, these are called stone cells. Compared
with most fibers, these cells are shorter, isodiametric or sometimes long and
star shaped. Their secondary cell walls are durable, thick and lignified. Mature
sclereid cells are usually dead. The walls of the cells are pitted. In the cortex,
fruits and seed shells of gymnosperm and dicot plants sclereids are found. In
the petioles of leaves, they may be present in the cluster form associated with
the epidermis, xylem and phloem,

Activity: Drawing three types of simple tissue.
Essentials: Poster papers, sign pens.

Procedure: Draw the labeled diagrams of the three types of tissue, and
present the differences among them.

Complex tissue

Permanent tissue composed of more than
one type of cell is called complex tissue.
Complex tissue conducts water, minerals
and prepared food, and this is why they are
also called conducting tissue. They can be
grouped into two types: xylem and phloem.
Xylem and phloem together form the
conducting structure of the vascular
bundle.

Metaxylen

Protoplasm

Figure : 2.13 A vascular bundle

2025
20 —

0)
=

Xylem: There are two types of xylem: primary and secondary. Xylem developed
during primary growth from the procambium is called primary xylem. Secondary
xylem is the xylem grown durimg secondary growth from the vascular cambium.
Primary xylem is of two types: protoxylem and metaxylem. At the primary stage
it is called protoxylem and after maturity it is called metaxylem. Metaxylem
develops after the protoxylem, but before secondary growth. Protoxylem is
distinguished by narrower vessels developed from smaller cells. Meiaxylem cells
are usually larger. Tracheids, vessels, xylem parenchyma and xylem fibers are the
constituents of xylem.

a) Tracheids: Tracheids are elongated cells with slender and sharp ends. After
lignification, their lumen may become narrower, and in that case transportation of
water occurs mainly through the lateral paired pits on their walls. Thickening of
walls is of different types, such as, elliptical, spiral, scalariform, reticulate and
pitted, Tracheids are found in ferns and gymnosperms, and are also present in the
primary and secondary xylem of angiosperms. Their main function is the
conduction of cell sap and to provide the organs with proper rigidity. Sometimes

they also store food.
pit |

b) Vessels: Vessels are short, tubular in structure,
and are connected from end. to end. Vessel cells
develop a long tube when their terminal walls are
dissolved. This is how a narrow continuous
channel is developed for the upward movement
of sap. In their early stage of development, the
cells are filled with protoplasm. Eventually they
die by losing protoplasm with the progression of

Tracheid Vessel Xylem fiber
en Sym. VER walls a become Figure : 2.14 Different types
differently thickened like tracheids, such as of xylem

scalariform, spiral, elliptical, pitted etc. A vessel is several centimeters long. But
they may be much longer in trees and creepers. They are found in almost all the
parts of angiosperms. Some advanced members of gymnosperms such as
Gnetum contain primary type of vessels. Their main function is to transport
water and minerals and to provide the organs with proper rigidity.

2025
¢) Xylem parenchyma; The parenchyma cells in the xylem are called xylem
parenchyma or wood parenchyma. Their walls may be thick or thin. The
parenchyma cells in the primary xylem have thin walls, but those in secondary
xylem are thick walled. Their main functions are storage of food and
transportation of water.

d) Xylem fiber: The sclerenchyma cells in the xylem are called xylem fibers or
wood fibers. The ends of this type of cells are tapereds. Mature cells do not
contain protoplasm, and so, become dead. These cells provide plants with
mechanical support. They are present in the xylem in dicots. Transportation of
water and minerals, storage of food and giving mechanical support and strength
to plants are their main functions.

Phloem: The phloem tissue organises the vascular bundle in association with the
xylem. The xylem transports water as raw materials of food, and the phloem
conducts food produced in leaves to the different parts of a plant. This type of
tissue is composed of sieve tube, companion cell, phloem parenchyma and
phloem fiber.

a) Sieve Cell: These are special types of cells. Sieve cells are arranged end to
end and make a tubular structure called the sieve tube. The cells are separated
from each other with a sieve like plate called the sieve plate. The protoplasm in
a sieve cell is closer to the wall, so that a hollow lumen is developed for the
conduction of food. Their walls are lignified. Mature sieve cells do not contain
nucleus. Companion cells and sieve tubes are present in the phloem of all the
angiosperms. Their main function is to conduct food produced in leaves to the
different parts of a plant.

Sieve plate

Sieve tube

Sieve pore
Sicve plate

Companion cell
Sieve tube

A-Longitudinal section B-Transverse section
Figure: 2.15 Phloem tissue

2023
2025

b) Companion cell: A parenchyma cell is found along with each sieve cell and

its nucleus is much larger. It is assumed that the nucleus of a companion cell
controls some activities of its neighboring sieve cell. A companion cell is turgid
with protoplasm and thin-walled, They are not found in the phloem of ferns and
angiosperms.

c) Phloem parenchyma: The parenchyma cells in phloem are called phloem
parenchyma. These types of cells are thin walled and have protoplasm like other
parenchyma. cells. They help store and conduct food. They are found in ferns,
gymnosperms and angiosperms, but not in monocots.

d) Phloem fiber: Phloem fibers are sclerenchyma cells. These long cells are
arranged end to end with each other. They are also called bast fibers. The fibers
of jute are such bast fibers. These types of fibers are developed at the time of
secondary growth of plant parts. Pits are present on the walls of these cells.
Through the phloem tissue, food produced in leaves and stored in roots are
simultaneously conducted up and down.

2.3.2 Animal tissues

In nvulticellular animals, many cells together may be involved in a special function.
Arising from the same embryonic cell when one or more than one type of cells
remain in a particular part of the animals body and collectively perform a common
function, this is called Tissue. That is to say, cells of a particular tissue are similar as
to their origin, function and structure. The study of the different types of tissue is
called Histology. The differences between tissues and cells are specific. Cell is the
structural and functional unit of tissue. For example, réd blood corpuscles, white
blood corpuscles, platelets are different types of cells. These are called connective
tissues. The liquid connective tissue takes part in different physiological processes.

In the human body there are different types of cells, which are engaged in
different activities. For exemple, nerve cells spread within the human body and
form a network. These cells receive stimuli and send it to the brain and send off
impulses from the brain back to the specific organs. Nerve cells in the ear and eye
help in vision and hearing. Due to the lack of different kinds of nerve cells, most
animals can not differentiate the exact colour of the objects unlike humans.
Many animals can see only at day time or at night,
Muscle cells are used in all kinds of activities : for example, writing, walking
and movement. Three kinds of blood cells are engaged m different activities.
Red blood corpuscles absorb oxygen from the lungs and transport oxygen from
the heart to different cells of the body through arteries and capillaries. White
blood corpuscles prevent disease.

Platelets are responsible for starting the process of blood clotting. As a result,
bleeding is stopped if there is a wound, Besides providing cover to the body,
integumentary cells perform different functions according to their location. Hair
grows from the integumentary cells of the head. Sweat is secreted from the sweat
glands. Bone cells constitute bones with deposition of minerals or cartilage, which
makes structure and supports the body.

Types of Animal Tissues

On the basis of nature and number of cells, and the presence or absence of the
intercellular materials or matrix secreted by cells, tissue is divided into four main
categories. The functions of these tissues are described below.

1. Epithelial Tissue

This tissue functions as the lining of various organs. But the function of this
tissue is not only to provide cover to the organs. There are more functions:
protection of underlying tissugs; secretion of waste products, including protein;
absorption of water and nutrients; transcellular transport of specific materials.
The cells of the epithelial tissue lie closely or side by side on a base
membrane, Based on the size of the cell, the location in the animal body and the
nature of work, this tissue is of three types :

(i) Squamous epithelial tissue: Cells of this tissue are flat like scales. The nucleus ts
large,

Example : Wall of the Bowman's capsule of kidney. Besides providing cover, it
is mainly active in filtration.

(ii) Cuboidal epithelial tissue: Cells of this tissue are cuboidal; Le. the length,

width and height of the cells are nearly equal.
Example: Collecting tubules of the kidney, mainly active in transportation and covering.

(iii) Columnar epithelial tissue: Cells of this tissue are narrow and elongated
like a column.

f025
Examiple ; Found in the interna! wall of intestine of vertebrates, mainly active in
secretion, protection and absorption.

Cell
Nucleus Cell

Figure: 2.17 Cubaidal epithelial tissue, Figure: : 2.18 Columnar
epithelial tissue,

Based on the number of cell layers arranged on the base membrane, epithelial
tissue is of three types:

i. Simple epithelial tissue : On the base membrane cells are arranged in a single
layer,

Example : Bowman's capsule of kidney, kidney tubules. wall of intestine.

ii. Stratified epithelial tissue : Cells are arranged on the basement membrane in
more than one layer. There are some stratified epithelial tissues, the layers of
which can change in minutes. Three or four layers can turn into seven or eight
layers in a moment. That is why it is often called transitional epithelial tissue.
Example : Integument of vertebrate animals.

iii. Pseudo stratified epithelial tissue : Cells of this tissue are arranged in a
single layet on basement membrane. The cells are not all of the same height, so,
this tissue is stratified .

Example : Trachea.

Celt ——3

Nuclews

— Figure: 2.20 Pseudo stratified epithelial tissue.
Figure: 2.19; Stratified or complex epithelial tissue.

Forma-05, Biology Class-9-10
The cells of epithelial tissue are transformed for different functions, such as:

i. Ciliated epithelial tissue : These are found in the wall of the trachea of
vertebrate animals,

ii. Flagellated epithelial tissue : These are found in flagellated muscular
epithelial cells in the endoderm of Hydra.

iii, Pseudopodial epithelial tissue ; Pseudopodial cells in the endoderms of
Hydra and in the inter-membrane cells of vertebrate animals are the example of
pseudopodial epithelial tissue.

iv. Reproductive tissue : These are specially transformed epithelial tissues
which produce sperm and ovum. Taking part in reproduction, they maintain the
continuation of species.

y. Glandular tissue : Epithelial tissue transformed into glandular tissue secrets
necessary fluid. This tissue forms the external and internal covering of any
organ or tubule. When transformed, this tissue takes part in protection, secretion,
absorption, diffusion, transportation ete.

2. Connective tissue: Connective tissue, has more matrix compared to the
number of cells is comparatively less. Based on structure and function
connective tissue is mainly of three types :

(i) Fibrous connective tissue: This type of connective tissue lies below the
body-integument and sparsely in muscles: In the matrix, different types of fibers are
visible.

(ii) Skeletal connective tissue:

The internal structural tissue of the
body is called the skeletal tissue. The
skeletal tissue forms the skeletal
system or the internal structure of the
body, gives the body definite shape and
firmness, helps in organ movenient and
locomotion, protects the soft and
sensitive organs of the body (e.g, the
brain, spinal cord, lungs, heart etc.), Figure: : 2.21 Connective tissue.
produces various types of blood corpuscles, and forms the surface for the
attachment of voluntary muscles.

2025
£23

Depending on the formation, skeletal tissue is of two types: Cartilage and Bone
Cartilage.

Cartilage : Cartilage is a kind of flexible skeletal tissue. Its matrix is firm and
elastic, and the cells contain lacunae. The nose and pinna of the ear of human are
made of cartilage. Besides that, in the humerus, femur etc. cartilage cover the
two ends of the bone which protects the bone from rubbing.

Bone : Bone is hard, fragile and inllexible skeletal connective tissue, but the
deposition of calcium within the matrix gives it strength .

(iii) Fluid connective tissue: The matrix of the fluid connective tissue is liquid
and mobile, Ditlerent kinds of organic colloids are soluble in the matrix. The
main function of the vascular tissue is to maintain circulation in the interior of
the body, and it plays a special role in protection from diseases and blood
clotting. Fluid connective tissue is of two types, blood and lymph.

Blood

Blood is a type of alkaline, slightly saline, red liquid connective tissue. Flowing
through the arteries, veins and capillaries, blood takes part in internal circulation.
In warm blooded aniraals it maintains body temperature balance. Blood is formed
of two components: (1) Plasma (55%) and (11) Blood cells or Blood corpuscles (45%),
Plasma is the liquid part of blood. It is yellowish in colour. It contains 91-92%
water and 8-9% organic and inorganic materials. The organic substances include
various types of blood protein and waste materials. Blood cells are of three
types: Red blood corpuscle (RBC) or Erythrocyte, White blood corpuscle
(WBC) or Leucocyte, and platelets or Thrombocyte. Red blood corpuscles
contain an iron compound called haemoglobin. The rec colour of blood is due to
the presence of haemoglobin. Haemoglobin easily mixes with oxygen to form
the oxyhacmoglobin compound, which carries oxygen to the different parts of
the body. Leucocytes destroy harmful microorganisms and protect the body
against diseases. There are various kinds of white blood cells in the human body.
Thrombocytes take part in blood coagulation or blood clotting, It will be
discussed in details in the sixth chapter.

Lymph

A yellow coloured and slightly alkaline liquid stored within the intercellular spaces
of the human body is called hymph. This is collected by small ducts and forms an

independent system and is called the lymphatic system. Lymph contains
lymphocyte cells and is called lymphoid cell.
Red blood esi White blood cell Platelets
Figure 2.22 ; Different types of blood cell
3. Muscular Tissue
Growing from the mesederm of the embryo, the particular type of tissue capable

of contracting and expanding to affect movement and tissue forming the muscles
of vertebrate animals is called Muscular tissue. Matrix is nearly absent in
muscular tissue. Muscle cells are delicate, elongated and fiber-like.

Myofibril with transverse striations are called striated muscles and those without
striations is smooth muscle. Through contraction and expansion, muscle cells
take part in organ movement and internal circulation.

Based on location, structure and functions, muscle tissue is of three types:
voluntary muscular tissue, involuntary muscular tissue and cardiac muscle.

i. Voluntary or Striated muscular tissue : This can be contracted or expanded at
the will of the animal. The cells of the voluntary muscle tissue are tubular,

unbranched, and have transverse striations. These generally have more than one
nucleus. This muscle can contract or expand quickly. Since the volumtary muscle

is adjacent to the bone system, thats why it is also called skeletal muscle. For
example, muscles of the hand and leg of human beings.
Sarcolemma

Intercalated disk
Nucleus
ce oe Nucleus
& |
yotibril Myofibril Re Res
Sarcolemm Myofibril

Voluntary muscle Involuntary musele = Cardiag muscle

Figure 2.23 Different types of muscles

2025
2025

ii. Involuntary or Smooth muscle : The contraction and expansion of this

muscle tissue does not depend on the will of the animal. This musele tissue 1s
spindle shaped and faintly branched. Transverse striations are not present. That
is why this muscle is called unmarked smooth muscle. Involuntary muscles are
found on the walls of blood vessels, alimentary canal, ete. of vertebrate animals.
Involuntary muscles mainly take part in the internal circulation of body, such as,
intestinal peristalsis in food digestion.

iii. Cardiac muscle ; The special type of involuntary muscle that forms the heart
of vertebrate animals is called the cardiac muscle. The cells of this muscle tissue
are tubular (very simular to those of voluntary muscle), branched, and have
transverse striations. Between the cells of this tissue, intercalated discs are
present. The contraction and relaxation of this tissue is not dependent on the will
of the animal. That is, the structure of heart muscles is like that of voluntary
muscles, and the function is like that of involuntary niuscle. So it ts also called
voluntary non-voluntary muscle. The cells of heart muscles remain joined
together by branches, so they all contract and relax together. Through rhythmic
contraction and relaxation, the cardiac muscle contro! the circulation of blood
within the body from a certain stage of the embryonic condition till the last
moment of death.

4, Nerve tissue : The particular type of
tissue which forms the nervous system is

Dendrite

; . Cell Body
called nervous tissue. It consists of

numerous neurons. You will learn about its
structure in chapter ten. It receives stimulus
from the environment, such as : heat, touch,
pressure. etc. The nervous tissue can Axon f
transmit these stimuli within the body and
according to that, can make the appropriate
response. The special type of cells which

Nucleus

Node of Rewvier

form nervous tissue are called nerve cells or
. Terminal
neuron. An ideal neuron has two parts — cell Buttons

body or soma and neuronal process or neurite;
the neurites can be of two types — axon and Figure 2.24: A neuron
dendrite. A neuron cell body is polygonal and nucleated.
The cytoplasm of the cell contains mitochondria, ribosome, golgi body,
endoplasmic reticulum, etc. But there is no active centriole in the cytoplasm of
neuron, so the neuron cannot divide. Cell body is surrounded by many small,
prolong parts. It is called dendron and the branches of dendron is called dendrite.
Dendrite is one or more than one in number. From the cell body of the neuron a
long nerve fiber emerges, which is attached to the dendrite of neuron. This is
called an axon. A neuron has only one axon. Between adjoiming neurons, a
bridge is formed by the union of the axon of one neuron with the dendrite of
another. This is called synapse. Through the synapse, nerve stimuli from one
neuron are transmitted to the next neurons. Nerve tissue receives stimulus and
transmits it to the brain, and the brain responds to tt. In higher animals, nerve
tissues store memory and control the work of the different organs of the body
and coordination among them.

There is a common belie! that we use only 10° of our brain , but this is not true.
In fact in usual conditions, human beings or any other animal make 100% use of
the brain. It is true that not all the parts of brain remain equally active at the
same time. But we make use of all of the parts of the brain from time to time.
Tt is also not correct that at any one time no more than 10% of the brain can be
used, There is no limitation.According to evolution, there is no reason to impose
such a limit.

2.4 Organ and System

A part of the animal body formed by the combination of one or more than one
type of tissues performing a particular function is called an organ. That is to say,
in any organ there may be one or more than one type of tissues and that organ
performs a particular function. The branch of biology where organs are
discussed is called Morphology.

According to location, there are two types of organs in the human body. The
branch of Biology where the morphology of external organs like eye, ear, nose,
hand, ete. are discussed is called External Morphology. The branch of Biology
where the internal organs of the organism are discussed is called Internal
Morphology or Anatomy. Stomach, duodenum, ileum, rectum, heart, liver,
pancreas, spleen, lung, kidney, testis, ovary etc, are human internal organs.

To perform various physiological functions, such as digestion, respiration,
excretion, reproduction, etc, several organs together form the organ system. In
human and in other animals some of these systems are described below-

2023
2025

Mouth Cavity
—}—— Qesaphagus
Liver
4). Stomach
Rectum

s

es

Digestive system Respiratory s¥stenm. Integumentary system

Exeretory system Nervous system Endocrine system

Figure : 2.25 Simplified structure of various system of human body
1. Digestive system : This system is associated with the ingestion of food,
digestion, absorption and removal of undigested faecal materials. The digestive
system has two main parts:
Digestive canal : This canal is formed with mouth aperture, mouth cavity,
pharynx, oesophagus, stomach, duodenum, ileum, rectum and anus,
Digestive glands : The salivary glands, liver and pancreas work as
digestive glands, The secretion from these gland helps to food digestion,

2.Respiratory system : In humans the respiratory system consists of the nasal
aperture, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchus, bronchioles, alveoli and a pair of lungs.
This system uses oxygen taken from the environment to produce energy, by the
oxidation of food present in the body cells. This energy helps in doing daily
work.

3. Nervous system : The function of this system is to receive external and
internal stimuli of the body and to create appropriate sensations. The nervous
system is made up of the bram, the spinal cord and cranial nerves and spinal
nerves, The nervous system has also a part named the Autonomous nervous
system. This part of the nervous system controls the involuntary actions of the
body.

4. Excretory system : Due to various physiological metabolic reactions some
nitrogenous waste materials are produced within the body as by-products. These
materials are generally toxic to the body and need to be removed. The process of
removing unnecessary and nitrogenous waste materials from the body is called
excretion. The system through which the excretion is performed is called the
excretory system. The excretory system of humans consists of a pair of ladneys,
a pair of urinary ducts, one urinary bladder. and one urethra.

5. Reproductive svstem: Through this system, an animal produces one or
more olfsprings to maintain the continuation of species. This system consists of
gamete producing and embryo bearing organs. When mature, an animal becomes
capable of reproducing. ln humans, the males possess the male reproductive
system while the female possesses the female reproductive system.

6. Integumentary system: The membrane covering the body from outside is
called integument or skin, This system covers the body, and protects the body
from external injury or attack of harmful microbes. It also controls the
movement of various materials through outside and inside of the body. It also
protects the liquid parts inside the body.

7. Endocrine system: There are a few ductless or endocrine glands within the
bodies of animals. These produce hormones and have no ducts for
transportation. Only blood carries the hormones from one place to another. The
endocrine system is made up of endocrine glands such as Pituitary, Thyroid,
Parathyroid, Islets of Langerhans of Pancreas, Suprarenal, etc.

g
By
Calms eestor

a ot ae ata en

41

2.5 Microscope

Just as a weapon is iniportant to a fighter and a telescope is important to an
astronomer, the microscope is essential to every student of biology. Very small
objects, invisible {to the naked eye, can be seen with a microscope. The
compound microscope you have in your school is able to observe very small
objects with the help of light. This type of microscope 1s called light microscope.
The microscope in which electrons are used instead of light is called the electron
microscope. Light microscopes are of two types: simple and compound
microscope.

2.5.1 Simple Microscope

In this microscope a flat stage made of glass is set with a vertical pillar on its base.
Two clips are attached on the two upper sides of the stage to hold the slide with
the object to be observed. There

is a sub-staged two-sided mirror = Handle

set with the vertical column of
the microscope to reflect light psy june
from an external source up Clip
through the bottom of the stage.

A continuous tube from the base

holds a Jens in its arm with @ .aiuctment Screw
ting. Setting the lens in the ring, Pillar
by adjusting the screw, an object Mitzor
put on the slide of the stage can

be focused. If needed, the task of
observing an object can be

started by focusing on tt with the

reflected light. The base, which

holds the whole thing, is called Figure 2.26: A simple microscope
the foot.

2.5.2 Compound Microscope

Eye piece -

Stage

It is useful to understand the different parts of a compound microscope before
using the instrument. Take a look at the picture of it.

Forma-06, Biology Class-9-10
Stand: This is a vertical pillar on the base.
Arm: The curved part above the stand is called the Arm.
Base: The part below the stand that looks like a platform is called the base.

Stage: This remains attached to the lower part arm.

Body Tube: It is the tubular part Body tube / ? certs
at the upper side of the rms
microscope. One end of it holds Nose piece /f] Ay ns sossnes

the eye piece. The objective
lenses are attached at the other —bjeetive
one Diaphragm.
Nose piece and Objective: Diaphrai
Below the body tube, the screw
F ‘ Mirer———.
revolving part or turret is called
the nose piece. Three objectives
(lens) are attached to it. These
are Low Power objective (10x —
12x), High Power objective Figure 2.27; A compound microscope
(40x — 45x) and Oil Immersion objective (100x), Some machines may have another
objective named Screening objective (4x — 5x). The numbers mentioned here with
x indicate how many times magnification occur by the lens or lens cooperative.
Eye piece: One (monocular) or two (binocular) eye pieces (lenses) are attached
to the upper part of the body tube, Its projection power is usually 10x — 20x,
Fine Adjustinent Knob: This is a small knob used for fine tuning. By rotating
of these knob the stage can be ups or down and as a result slides can be taken
inside or outside the focal length, causing fine tuning of the focus on the object.
Tt is used after using the coarse adjustment knob.

Coarse Adjustment knob: This is a big round knob used for focusing on the
object. By turning the knob, the object can be brought into approximate focus.
By slightly rotating of this knob the stage can be moved well. Coarse adjustment
is done by this knob.

Sub stage Diaphragm and Condenser: The Sub stage is below the stage and

it can be elevated or lowered. A condenser is attached to it. The condenser
contains a diaphragm that controls the intensity of light.

2025
£23

Tituminator: A source of light (such as mirror or light bulb) located at the centre
of the base from which light enters the lens through the condenser.

Use of a compound microscope: To use the natural light for illumination of the
object,the microscope needs to be set in a sufficient lighted place. At first, the
mirror of the microscope is adjusted such that reflected light illuminates the
object to be observed on the slide, passing through the hole of the stage. If an
artificial illuminator is present in the microscope, it is enough to use that only.
The clips on the stage are placed on the slide to hold it properly.

Now, after moving the nosepiece, the objective of lowest power would be set
straight on the slide. Using first the coarse adjustment knob and then the fine
adjustment knob, the object is accurately brought in focus. Now the magnified
object can be viewed, keeping the eye on the eye piece lens. If required, the fine
adjustment knob can be used to make vision more clear. At the time of viewing
an object, both the eves should be kept open. Though it is little hard, practice
will make it easier. The eyes get soon tited if one is used and the other is closed.
If the lens of higher power is required, moving the nosepiece, the expected lens
can be set to focus the object but in this case, students can seek the help of a
teacher.

Staining

When a fine layer of cell or tissue is observed through microscope, it becomes
difficult to differentiate it from the liquid medium it is immersed in. One of the
techniques to solve this problem is to use dye to define and enhance contrast of
ihe cell or tissue. Staming can be done with such a degree of fineness thal one
can preferentially starn only a particular cell, a cell component, an organelle or
a particular component of a tissue. This is called slide staining. Materials used
for dying or staming are called Stains.

2.5.3 Electron Microscope

The shorter the wavelength of the light used. the better the resolution.
Ordinarily, it is not possible to focus an objects smaller than half of the
wavelength in the microscope. The wavelength of photons of visible spectrum
of light is 400—700 nm. So even witha high quality light microscope, an object
less than 200 nm cannot be well magnified even after combining a number of
lenses. As a result, besides the plasmalemma, the nucleus and the cytoplasm
of a cell, no other part is visible clearly in a light microscope. Organelles
in the cytoplasm cannot be differentiated.

In order to solve this problem, electron
waves are used instead of photons as
the wavelength of electrons is much
shorter than that of photons. In
place of ordinary lens, a powerful
electromagnet is used as it can change
the course of electro waves just like
glass changes the course of light. This
allows organelles in a cell to become
clearly visible. The microscope
where electron wave is used for
magnification, is called Electron
microscope (not electronic).We cannot
directly view the image magnified by
the clectron wave. After being
processed, the image is seen in the
monitor of a computer attached to the
electron microscope.

(@) Individual Activity

Figure 2.28 An Electron Mieroscope

' Activity-1: Observation of a plant cell (onion cell) under a microscope.

Essentials: Onion, blade, slide, cover slip, watch glass, brush, glycerine,
safranin solution, dropper, blotting paper and microscope.

Procedure: Remove the outer dry scale leaves of the onion. Now, take a
swollen, fleshy scale leaf. After removing a small outer layer from the surface
of the scale with the help of a blade, put it in water in a watch glass. Take
safranin solution m another watch glass. Now with the help of a brush pick up
the surface layer of scale [rom the water of first watch glass and keep this into
safranin solution of second watch glass. Wait for 30 seconds. After that using a
brush take the surface layer from safranin stained watch glass into the water of
the first watch glass. It is notable that the safranin has been used as the stain
here. Take 2-3 drops of glycerine in the center of a clean dried slide. Keep
surface layer into the glycerine of slide from the watch glass with the help of a
_ brush, After that put a cover slip on it. Care should be taken so that there is no

2025
2025

alr or bubbles under the cover slip. The excessive solution and ulycerine
outside the area of the cover slip with the help of the blottmg paper.

Observation: Observe it under the objective with the lowest power in a
compound microscope. You will be able to see rectangular and thin walled
cells. Now, observe them with an objective with higher power. In every cell,
you will find thin, granular protoplasm, vacuole and a sided nucleus. Draw
and label what you have seen,

@) Individual Activity

“Activity-2: Observation of an animal cell (buccal mucosa cell) under a \
microscope.

Essentials: microscope, slide, cover slip, methylene blue solution, glycerin,
dropper, blotting paper. cotton swab.

Caution: Methylene blue is harmful to health, so gloves, goggles, mask etc.
should be used while working with it.

Procedure: Place |-2 drops of water on one end of a clean slide. Then use a
clean, dry finger to gently rub the inside of the cheek against the shiny lining
inside the mouth, causing some of the epithelial cells to stick to it. Take
teacher's help to avoid injury while doing this. Hold the side of the finger that
has been rubbed into the cheek in the water on the slide and tub evenly
towards the other end of the slide about three-quarters of the way to spread
the water. Since animal cells do not have cell walls, rubbing with too much
force can easily tear the cells, so be careful! Then spread a few drops of
methylene blue solution with a dropper on the watered part of the slide. Make
sure the slide is parallel to the ground while doing the work. Then wait for 2-3
minutes. Note that methylene blue has been used as a stain here. Now drop
2-3 drops of glycerine on the centre of the slide with a dropper and slowly
place a cover slip on top of it parallel to the slide. Care should be taken not to
allow air or bubbles to enter under the cover slip, Gently tap the cover slip so
that the cells spread evenly undemeath. Carefully absorb excess
solution/glycerin beyond the area of the cover slip with blotting paper.
Observation: Focusing a little under the microscope will reveal many
polygonal cells. No cell wall, plastid or vacuoles can be seen in them. A thin
cell membrane or plasmalemma surrounds the cell and a nucleus in the
centre. If the cells are not well spread, they may appear overlapping.

Note: The test can be done without using metlrylene blue or any other stain.

\In that case visualization of the cells would be somewhat laborious.

AB Biology
(?)Exercise

1. What is meant by cell?

2. What are the functions of plastids?

3. What is the relation between tissue and organ?

4. What is the importance of endocrine glands?

5. Which part of cell is called the ‘Power house’ of the cell?
6, What are the functions of blood?

1. Describe the structure of a mitochondrion with a labeled diagram.

2. Make comparative discussion on the structures and functions of different types
of simple tissue,

3. Discuss the structures and functions of animal tissue.

1. Which is the function of lysosome?
a. to produce food b. to produce energy
c. to engulf microorganisms d. to synthesize protem

2. Amobea is an animal cell, because it has-
i, well formed nucleus

ii, pigments
ii. cell membrane
Which one is correct?
a) i & ii b) i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii

Read the following stem and answer the questions 3 and 4.
On the way to his village home, Ruhit saw a man extracting fibers from a jute plant.

2025
3. What kind of tissue mentioned in stem is being collected?
a, Parenchyma b. Collenchyma
c. Chlorenchyma d, Selerenchyma

4. The characterstics of the tissue mentioned in stem are:
i. cell wall is lignified
u. cell wall is irregularly thickened
it. protoplasm is absent m the cell

Which one of the following answers is correct?

ai & ii b. it & a
c. 1 & ili dei, it & iii

1.
a) What is plasmalemma?

b) Why are plastids called colour forming organs?
c) Why is the organelle marked with N important for the living
world? Explain.
d) What types of problem will appear in living bodies if
the part marked M is absent? Analyse it.

a) What is muscle tissue?

b) How does skeletal tissue protect the brain?

c) Explain the cause of the location of part marked Q shown in figure A?

d) Between Figure A and B, which one plays an important role in
physiological activities, besides conduction? Explain your answer with

2025

logic.
