16 Chemistry

Sign 1 Sign 2 Sign 3

a. What is chemistry?
b. Why do we take antacid for acidity in the stomach?

a The substances containing sign 3 harmful for human beings- explain.

d, Chemical substances containing sign 1 and sign 2 are risky
when in use- explain.

2025
Chapter Two
States of Matter

Matter is a physical entity that has mass and occupies space. Chairs, tables,
notebooks, pens, ice, water, air- are all matter. All matters may exist in three
different states- solid, liquid and gaseous states. They have their own
characteristics and properties in all three states. This chapter will focus on these
issues.

Forma-3, Chemistry Class-9-10
Chemistry

explain the physical properties of matter in terms of the postulates of
kinetic theory of particles

explain diffusion and effusion with the help of kinetic theory
explain the relationship between physical state of a matter and heat
demonstrate practically the increase in the rate of diffusion with the
increase of heat

describe melting and sublimation of solids and distillation of liquids
demonstrate practically melting and sublimation of solids and
distillation of liquids

show interest in explaining the real happenings in nature in terms of
chemistry

use of chemical compounds and thermometer properly

20235
ue,
3
ry

States of Matter 19

2.1 Three States of Matter

Anything that has a certain mass and occupies space is matter. At normal room
lermmperature some matters may exist as solids, some as liquids and some as
gasses. For example, at normal room temperature sugar, edible salt, marble etc.
exist as solids: water, oil, kerosene etc. exist as liquids and nitrogen. oxygen,
carbon dioxide etc. exist as gasses. Again, changing the temperature. the same
matter’s state can be transformed into any of solid, liquid or gaseous states.
Below is given a short discussion on the properties and characteristics of solids,
liquids and gaseous matters.

[Question: When the temperature is changed, the same substance becomes

solid, liquid and gaseous. Give examples. |

2.1.1 Solids

A solid matter has a specific mass, volume and shape. Molecules of all matters
have a force of attraction. It is known as inter molecular attraction. This force is
the most in the solid matters. As a result, the molecules in solids stay very close
to each other in a fixed state and they take a fixed dimension which cannot be
compressed with pressure. Again, a solid matter hardly changes shape when the
temperature is raised. Particles of solids can not move or leave spece, but can
vibrate in their own place.

2.1.2 Liquids

Liquids have a specific mass and volume but do not have a shape. Liquids take
the shapes of their containers. Since the molecules of a liquid remain farther
from each other than those of solids, the inter molecular force of attraction is
also less than solids. Such matters do not change volume when force is
projected on them but the volume increases with the rise of temperature. This
change of volume is greater than that of solids.

(Question: Why are the particles of liquids spaced a little further apart than
those of solids? |

2.1.3 Gases

Gases have specific mass but they do not have specific volume or shape.
Whatever quantity of gas is put into any size of container, it takes over the full
20 Chemistry

size of that container. The molecules in gases stay further than those of liquids
or solids. The inter molecular force of attraction is also very low among them, A
sinall quantity of pressure is enough to compress gases and in the same way, a
sinall amount of temperature is enough to increase the volume of such matters.

2.2 Kinetic Theory of Particles

Every substance is made of small particles which remain together by means of
an inter molecular force of attraction. These molecules also have a kinetic force
in them. The attempt to prove the states of substances using inter molecular force
of attraction and the kinetic force of the particles is known as the kinetic theory
of particles. When the particles inside a substance remain in very high force of
attraction, they stay together and cannot move that much. This is the solid state.
When heat is applied on sucha solid substance, the particles start to vibrate.

* F eee

Solid substance Liquid substance Gaseous substance

Fig 2.01: Kinehe Theory of Particles.

When more heat is applied, the particles lose some of their force of attraction
and they start some movement. This state of matter is called a liquid. Liquid
takes the shape of the container without changing their volume, When more heat
is applied on this liquid state of the substance, the particles receive the heat and
the kinetic force in them is increased, This kinetic force is increased to a level
where they lose inter molecular force of attraction almost completely and start

to move freely. This is the gaseous state. That is why gaseous matter has no
absolute volume. The volume of the container in which it is kept is the
volume of the gas. When more heat is applied to this state of the substance, the
particles will only increase their speed of movement.

£023
2025

States of Matter 21

2.3 Diffusion

The tendency of solid, liquid or gas to spread spontaneously and uniformly in
any medium is called diffusion. In diffusion process, solid, liquid or gas moves
spontaneously from a place of higher concentration to lower concentration.
Remember, what happens if you leave a perfume bottle with its lid open in the
corner of aroom? Within some time, you will find the whole room smelling of
perfume. This is an instance of diffusion. If a matter takes lesser time to spread,
its rate of diffusion is higher and vice versa.

Now, read through the following experiments.

«)

 Repextment 1 >
At room temperature, take some pure water in a glass jar. Add a small
quantity of solid pink Potassium permanganate (KMnO,) into it. You will
see, after sometime, the KMn0O, grains are dissolving into a pink solution.
Indeed, the KMnO, particles are getting motion and scattering freely in the
water. In this case, some solid matter is diffused in water or liquid. The rate
of diffusion of solid matters in water is slow, however, if heat is applied, the
rate will increase.

Similarly, if we do the experiment of

diffusion of Potassium permanganate in hot
water, the water will turn into pink solution |
faster, In this case, the KMnO F particles will
get added motion due to heat and scatter

faster. This shows that the presence of heat
increases the rate of diffusion of solids wen

Fig 2.02:KMnQ, solution in water.

Mis r

‘Experiment 2 yl
Atroom temperature, take some pure water in a beaker and add some liquid
blue in it. Within a few moments. you will see that the water has turned blue.
That means, the particles of blue solution or some liquid have diffused in the
water. The temperature being the same, it has taken the liquid less time to
diffuse in another liquid than solid KMnO,. That means, the rate of diffusion
of liquid matter in another liquid is faster than in solid matter. The presence

of heat will increase the rate. Just like solids and liquids, diffusion of gases take
place in the liquid medium. However, at a given temperature, the diffusion rate a
gaseous substances is higher than that of solids and liquids in liquid mediums.

See

Fig 2.03: Diffusion of Liquid solution in liquid.

f seseespnci nt 3 7

Diffusion of two gases.

Take a glass tube with both faces open. Take two pieces of cottons. Soak
a piece of cotton in concentrated hydrochloric acid (HCI) solution and soak
the other in ammonium hydroxide (NH,OH) solution. Now close the glass

tube fixing each of the cottons to a side of it. Here hydrogen chloride

gas from HCI solution and ammonia gas from NII,OH solution will get

\_dittused.

2025
2025

States of Matter 23

Within a few moments, you will see a white smoke filling up the tube. It is
ammonium chloride (NHC), produced in the reaction between hydrogen
chloride gas and ammonia gas. The white smoke will not be positioned in
the centre of the tube; it will be nearer to the hydrochloric acid solution. That
means at a same given time, hydrogen chloride gas has gone a lesser
distance than ammonia. That also proves that ammonia gas spreads faster
than hydrogen chloride gas because of its faster rate of diffusion. The reason
behind it is the difference in their atomic masses. A gas with lesser atomic
mass will have a better diffusion rate. Here ammonia gas (atomic mass 17)

has spread faster than hydrogen chloride gas (atomic mass 36.5),

white smoke of MHC!

\
=
?

wet cotton with HC! solution

wet cotton with NH,OH solution

Fig 2.04; Diffusion of two gases.

Atomic mass of H,, He, N,,O, and CO, gases are 2, 4, 28, 32 and 44 respectively. Since
hydrogen is the gas with the least atomic mass, its rate of diffusion is faster than others

while carbon dioxide’s being the most, is the slowest.

Ng Z#

24 Chemistry

2.4 Effusion

The passage of gases from a high pressure zone to a low pressure zone through

a fine pore is called effusion.

Take a balloon and fill it with air or helium. Stick a piece of scotch tape on the
balloon. Now, make a small pore on the balloon through the scotch tape and see
what happens. The air from the balloon will come out through the hole with
force (Don’t try it without the scotch tape; the balloon will burst). Air pressure
inside the balloon was higher than outside. So, when the air found the hole, the
air from the balloon rushed towards the low pressure region. It is effusion. Like
the rate of diffusion if heat is applied, the rate of effusion increases. If heat is
applied, the rate of effusion increases very much like the rate of diffusion.

We use CNG (compressed natural gas) as fuel in our vehicles. Basically, it is
compressed methane gas at high pressure. When we run our vehicle, this gas
comes out of the cylinder with high pressure and runs the engine. This is also
effusion of gas. Again, propane and butane gases are compressed at high
pressure into liquid and put into cylinders to use them for cooking in the
households. When we open the cylinder for cooking, it comes out in gaseous

form with pressure. It is another example of effusion.

Effusion and diffusion are by nature, the same kind of actions. The basic
difference between them is, effusion requires the presence of pressure but
diffusion does not depend on pressure. In diffusion, solids, liquids or gases
matter spread around in a suitable medium but in effusion, only gas comes out
through a fine hole from the container . If we open the cylinder but do not ignite
our cooker, the gas from the cylinder will just come out and mix with air. This
is effusion, Then, the gas that comes out would spread around the room, which

is diffusion. Therefore, both the actions may take place one after another.

2025
States of Matter

25

2.5 Burning of a Candle and the Three States of Wax

Liquid Wax

Solicl Wax

Fig 2.05: Burning of Wax.

Wax is a mixture of various hydrocarbons.
Organic compounds made of hydrogen and
earbon are known as hydrocarbons. In the
burning of a wax, three states of matter can be
observed simultaneously. There is a thin liner
inside the wax. When we add fire to it, the
hydrocarbon particles around the liner melt
into liquid. The liquid wax absorbs heat and
vaporizes first. Then the vaporized wax starts
areaction with oxygen of the air and produces
carbon dioxide, water vapor, light and heat. A
portion of the liquid wax remains and turns
solid again. Thus. in the presence of heat we
see three states of wax.

2.6 Melting and Boiling

The process of transforming a solid matter into liquid by means of applying heat
is called melting. At normal pressure (1 atmospheric pressure), the temperature
at which a solid matter turns into liquid state is called the melting point of that
solid. Each pure solid matter has its own melting point, like the melting point of

ice is O°C.

The process of transforming a liquid matter into gas by means of heat is called
boiling. At normal pressure (1 atmospheric pressure), the temperature at which a
liquid matter turns into gaseous state is called the boiling point of that liquid.
Each pure liquid matter has its own boiling point, like the boiling point of water
is 100°C, The boiling process requires heat but solidification requires removal of

heat,

Forma-4, Chemistry Class-9-10
Experiment 4

Suppose, we want to find out the melting point of urea, a solid matter, First,
we need to put a net on a triped, upon which we shall place a watch glass.
Now we shall put some urea on the watch glass. Fix a thermometer with a
liner on a stand and put the bulb of thermometer in the urea, Now start giving
heat to the urea, You will find, the urea will start to melt at 133°C

Stand

Liner

Watch
glass

Fig 2.06: Melting point of urea.

oy

temperature and all the fertilizer will
melt at the same temperature. This
133°C is the melting point of urea.
Again, let's find out the melting point
of an impure matter, wax. In order to
find it out, first we need to turn the
wax into powder. Collect the wax
powder inside a glass tube with one
side closed. Now fix a thermometer
inside following the fig 2.07. Sink the
glass tube in the beaker in such a way
so that water can’t get inside the tube.
Now, start heating the beaker slowly.
You will find the wax melting at a
specific range of temperature instead
of a fixed temperature. This range of
temperature is the melting point of
Wada.

tt

20235
2025

States of Matter 27

la

Melting pomt of impure substances is deme]

than that of pure substances. It is opposite in
4 the case with boiling point. A mixed matter
will have no fixed melting and boiling point.
Since all pure solids have a specific melting
point, they melt at that temperature. If a
solid substance melts at any other
temperature, the solid can be declared
impure. Again. if it melts over a range of
temperatures, it is impure too. For example:
the melting point of sulfur at 1 atm is 115°C,
But in an experiment, if sulfur melts at any
other temperature or range of temperatures,
the sample of sulfur can be declared
adulterated. Therefore,finding the melting
point can be a way to find the purity of solid
substances. a

Fig 2.07: Melting point of wax.

Experiment 5

Boiling Point of Liquids

Some sample of the liquid (Example: water), the boiling point of which
needs be determined, is taken im a beaker. The beaker is fixed with a
thermometer. Now, the beaker will be heated carefully with a Bunsen
burner, At a certain temperature, the water in the beaker will turn into vapor.
That temperature is the boiling point of water. All the water in the beaker
will vaporize at 100°C.

That sets the boiling point of water at 100°C (at 1 atm). Since each liquid

matter has a specific boiling point, so a boiling point cannot be the same for
Pe

28 Chemistry

two liquids. Again, if a liquid is adulterated, it will boil at a different )
temperature. For example, if we add some alcohol to water, it will boil at a
different temperature than 100°C. So, boiling point can be a determiner of
the purity of a liquid.

Stand

Thermometer

aq

a Bunsen burner

Fig 2.08: Boiling point of water.

XN ws

You have learned, the heat used in boiling and melting does not change the
temperature of the matter. It only transforms the state of the matter.

The experiment below will tell you what will happen if we apply heat on a solid
to melt it and then heat more to boil it.

Experiment 6

Let us take some ice cubes in a beaker and heat it carefully. We shall keep
watch on an attached thermometer throughout the process. Let’s assume,
the initial temperature of the ice was -40°C.

£023
2025

States of Matter

28

me f- Vapor
D

Boiling point
Water of water

_____-}»
Temperature CC)

* M Axis

(heat absorbed) _ Time

Fig 2.09: Graph of applying heat on ice.

When the temperature of the ice reaches 0°C absorbing the heat, they melt
into liquid. The temperature remains stagnant at 0°C until all the ice cubes
melt into the water. That proves 0°C as the melting point of ice. The
straight line in the temperature is called the melting point line. In the fig
2.09, line AB is the melting point line. Both ice and water exist through
the length of the line. If we apply more heat, the temperature of water
starts to rise, When it reaches 100°C, you'll see more heat will not be able
to raise the temperature of water anymore. Rather, the water transforms
into vapor. All the water will vaporize at this 100°C temperature. If we
apply more heat after that, the temperature of the water vapor will
increase. The —_ boiling point of water is 100°C. CD is the line of boiling
polnt. Water and vapor co-exist at this line. J

30 Chenustry

- *

Again, collect the data of cooling the water vapor and set them on a graph

sheet with X axis telling time and Y axis telling temperature. It will be like
fig 2.10.

y Axis

>

5 —_
Ss 6
1 i

:

cats petnnnnnean Boiling point

—— Water

—
Temperature (°C)
rae

ul
o
i

Bir EET RRnRn CRN eR RL RNP

point — ice
20 4

0 x Axis
(heat released) Time , > ;

Fig 2.10: Cooling curve of vapor,

The graph shows the initial temperature of water vapor is 140°C. When in
the process of cooling it to 100°C, the vapor starts to turn into water. It
remains 100°C until all the vapor is turned into water. Further cooling starts
to decrease the temperature of water, When it reaches ()°C, the water starts to
transform into ice. It remains the same until all the water is turned into ice
and then the temperature of ice decreases from 0°C. The fig 2.10 shows a
decrease of temperature of ice to -40°C.

7 yy,

2025
2025

States of Matter 31

2.7 Distillation and Sublimation

The process of heating a liquid and turning it into gas is called evaporation or
vaporization. When water from a hot tea is converted to vapors, that is an
example of vaporization. Again if we cool that vapor, the vapor turns into liquid.
This process is called condensation. For example, water vapor emits heat and
turns into water, which is condensation. The process of heating a liquid into
vapor and then retrieving the liquid from the vapor by cooling it is called
distillation. That means,

[ Distillation = vaporization + condensation

Figure 2.11 shows the change of state of a volatile substance by applying heat.

gaseous state

o)

applying heat | @

by

1

@

@
@

0.

solid state

Fig 2.11: Sublimation of substance.

The process in which heating a solid directly turns that solid into a gaseous
substance instead of a liquid, is called sublimation. Ammonium Chloride
(NH,Cl), camphor (C,H, ,O), Naphthalene (C,.H,), solid Carbon dioxide (CO,),
Iodine (I,), Aluminum Chloride (AICL,)etc. are matters that do not turn liquid if
heat is applied, Instead, they vaporize, These substances are called sublimated
substances.
32 Chemistry

Experiment 7

Take some solid aluminum chloride
salt in a beaker. Put a glass lid on its
open face. Put some ice cubes on
the lid. Now, apply heat slowly on
the beaker. You'll see the solid
AICL, is turning into gaseous
form absorbing heat. This gaseous
AICI, again reaches the lid and
under the influence of ice.
condenses itself underneath the lid. Fig 2.11: Sublimation of A/CK,.

*. Z

If a sublimated substance is mixed with some solid matter, it can be retrieved
by means of the sublimation process. For example, if some ammonium
chloride (NH,Cl) is mixed with some edible salt (NaCl), it can be separated by
the process of sublimation. If heat is continuously applied to a sublimated
substance, it vaporizes. In iodized salt, iodine is a sublimated substance. If you

apply heat to that salt, the iodine will be vaporized from there,

The vapor can be cooled into solid iodine. However, since the mixture of sand
and glucose does not contain any sublimated substance, therefore, you cannot
separate them by sublimation.

(?) Exercise

1. What kind of action takes place when hot tea is kept in a tea cup?
a. vaporization b. sublimation

c. diffusion d. effusion

2025
States of Matter

2, What will happen to the particles when water vapor is condensed?
a. size will reduce b. will remain in movement
c. will vibrate at the same position d. energy will evolve

3 Which of the following pictures is applicable for sublimation?

ime) ‘ _—

Pe **
loeve
oo 5

4, Heating curve of unknown solid matter Z tells us:
i. melting point of Z is 154°C

i. Z 1s volatile

Heating curve af
4 woknown gabetence Z

il. AB and CD curves indicate the|
boiling and melting lines of Z

Which of the below is correct :

Temgersrary ("C)

aiandii — b. ti and iti

c.iandiii d.ijii and ni : ai ©. 2
Thee Aor | i

5, Which of the followings has the highest rate of diffusion?

a. CO, b. NH,
c. HCl d. H,SO,

6. Which of the followings can be sublimated?
a. Iodine b. Edible salt

c. Copper sulfate  d.Sodaash

Forma-5, Chemistry Class-9-10
d.
3,

Chemistry

What is diffusion?
When you open the gas a ee

cylinder used for cooking, a Sip Slee
which action takes place first- ccc Salt
diffusion or effusion?

If you increase heat, which of
the matters in the stem will
vaporize first? Explain.

Can you separate the elements of the two mixtures using the same process’?

Show reasons for your answer.

White smoke of NH,CI
What is effusion? A. 40cm A. . 60cm 8
Why are melting point and C ) \;
boiling point different for J
the same matter? Wet cotton with HCI solution — Wet cotton with NH,OH
What kind of change is the anes
process of the stem?
Explain.

Why white smoke is produced at the end A of the tube? Explain with logic.

A beaker containing some ice cubes is slowly heated. With the passage of

time, the changes in the state of ice are observed.

What is distillation?

What do you understand by diffusion and effusion?

Present the action of the stem on a graph sheet.

What will happen if you replace ice of the stem with naphthalene?
Analyze.

foo p

20235
