CHAPTER THREE

Self-employement

Bangladesh is a developing country. According to Bangladesh Statistics 2018,
estimated population of the country is 16 crore 27 lac. 80% of this total
population lives in village. As per Economic Review 2018. contribution of
agriculture in the national economy is 14.23%, Industrial Sector contributes 33.66%
and service sector contributes 52.11%, But, the unemployment problem in the
country 1s increasing day by day because of high birth rate, under developed
economy and less employment opportunity in comparison to high demand.
Bureau of Statistics Report 2010 states thal Bangladesh has 26 lac unemployed
people. Number of total eligible worker in the country is 5 crore 67 lac. Young
people comprise one third of this total eligible worker. This large number of
work eligible unemployed population cannot be engaged in salaried job.
Self-employment is necessary. We will learn about the various nature of
Self-employment in this chapter.

=4 —
After completing this chapter, we shall be able to

* Explain the concept of Self-employment

« Explain the relation between Self-employment and entrepreneurship

« Explain the necessity of training for Self-employment

@ Select the suitable and profitable sectors for Self-employment considering
the socio economic condition of Bangladesh.

« Describe the activities and importance of training institutions for
Self- employment,

* Describe the ways for motivating Self-employment

20235
2025

Self-employment 27

Concept of Sil so ai

a rai Me - y x 1 { Tt.
Hafizur of Bhandaria-an satel of defeating poverty through cultivation of bitter gourd,

After completing SSC, Mr. Hafizur Rahman started working in a ship. Low
grade job but involves a lot of hard work, But, wage is very poor. He could
hardly maintain his family. He was forced to resign from his job in the ship and
come back to his village. He failed to join a pharmaceutical company after trying
hard. He could not manage it since he did not have the BA pass certificate. But,
industrious Hafizur was not demoralized. He started to think about doing
something on the bare land beside his house, Having advice from the Upazila
Agricultural Officer, he started growing Bitter Gourd (Korola) in that bare land.
Now, he grows seven mound of Bitter Gourd per week. He is now solvent in
maintaining a family of six members from the income from selling Bitter Gourd.
Educated farmer Hafizur of village Matibhanga of Bhandaria Upazila at Pirojpur
District has removed unemployment and has become self sufficient by growing
Bitter Gourd and other vegetables. He has won against poverty.

Hafizur informed that he has cultivated vegetables in two acres of land. He has
erown Hybrid Tia type of Bitter Gourd in half of this land. In rest of the land he
has grown Indian Spinach (Pui Shak), String bean (Borboti), Wax Gourd
(Kumra), Brinjal (Begoon), Snake Gourd (Chichinga), and Okra (Dherosh). He
sells the Bitter Gourd to the local wholesaler at a rate of Taka 30 per keg.
Wholesalers come to his land to buy the Bitter Gourd. He is hopeful to earn
nearly Taka three lac this year, But, he spent fifty five thousand taka for growing
this Bitter Gourd. Since, Hafizur is a motivated farmer, he has become
successful. Mr. Narayan Chandra Majumder from the agricultural office says in
this regard that many people have been motivated to grow vegetables seeing the
success of Hafizur. This is a matter of inspiration for any unemployed youth.
28 Business Entrepreneurship

The way Mr. Hafizur Rahman has managed to be employed by himself is called
Self-employment. Now, we can understand that Sell-employment is the process
of earning a living by self-effort through using own capital or borrowed fund,
own thinking, knowledge, intelligence and efficiency and taking minimum risk.
Self-employment is a popular profession among various techniques for earning
a living. Various retailing, repairing, radio and television, poultry farming, AP
culture etc, are included in Self-employment.

Relationship between business entrepreneur and Self-employment is very close.
In case of Self-employment, an individual starts working after thinking about the
job. A Self-employed person becomes an entrepreneur, when he thinks about the
employment of other people in the society along with his own employment and
steps forward against risk and forms an organization. In that case all the
entrepreneurs can be called Self-employed but all the Self-employed persons are
not entrepreneur.

Activity I: Find out ten Self employing professions near your school
and house

Wo) Go) —~1) Gi] Gn] fe] uel poa; ee

—
oS

Necessity of Self-employment

Sanjida Islam from Noakhali failed to mange a job after completing her honors
degree from the local college. After remaining unemployed for a period, she
decided to undertake training on horticulture from the local Youth Development
Office. After completion of the training she grew flower in one acre of land.
During the first season she earned fifty thousand taka. She became severely
interested gaining the profit. Then, she went to Dhaka to join a daylong
workshop on growing flower and visited a Flower Fair (Pushpo Mela). She

£023
2025

Self-employment 29

collected seeds of various local and foreign flowers from the Mower fair and
earned a lot of money from growing them. Because of hard work and proper
utilization of opportunity her business grew very large within five years.
Recently, she received the Best Women Entrepreneur Award from her district.
While receiving the award she spoke about the following necessities of
Self-employment to the present mass;

Employment can be divided into three groups - Wages or Salary based
Self-employment and Business.

Public and private organizations are the main source for employment.

The number of work eligible people increases. with increase of
population.Employment opportunity does not increase comparing to
the rate of demand for employment.

In other profession earning opportunity is limited, But, in case of Self-
employment, earning at the beginning is low and uncertain and
possibility of earning afterwards in this profession is unlimited.

At present, opportunity for self-employment has vastly increased.
Social status for self employed people has increased comparing to the
previous time.

The major capital for self employment is self efficiency. It is
comparatively easier to arrange capital required for raw materials and
machineries.

Self-employment is an independent profession. Since, one can do this
from ones own home and land, extra cost can be avoided.

The youth of the country engaged in self-employment can contribute
to the development of the country rather engaging in anti social
works.

Wages in Bangladesh is very poor because of large population. More
over, in our country seasonal unemployment problem is acute. To
solve such problems, self-employment can contribute significantly.

Through self employment migration to towns can be controlled and
development of village society and economy can be ensured.

The self employment mentality motivates the youth for patriotism and
encourages willful works.

Age is never a burden for self employment. A person of any age can
earn through self employment as per his/her efficiency level.
30

What are the significance of self-employment you have realized from the speech

Business Entrepreneurship

of Sanjida Islam? More over, write down five important reasons for self
employment that you think are important : Acitivity-2

in| ee) Gd) Bo)

Suitable and Profitable Areas of Self-employment in Socio-
economic Context of Bangladesh

As it is possible to earn a respectful living being engaged in any small business
from the motivation of self-employment of ownership and own management,
similarly contribution can be made to the economic development of the country.
One can earn by producing and selling goods or providing services that have
demand. We have to keep in mind always to earn respectfully from our limited
resources through proper utilization. Analyzing all these, we can identify several

suitable and profitable areas for self-employment.

Suitable and profitable areas for self-employment:

Hand loom (weaving)
Mat Making

Pottery

Making goods of Bamboo
Growing Salt

Tailoring

Making Clothes

Making Nets to catch fish
Carpentry

Making Furniture of Steel
Plate Making from Clay
Blacksmiths

Seri Culture

Live Stock and Poultry Farm
Making things from Cane
Making Utensils of Glass
Ring (for well) Making

Making things of Copper &
Titanium

Making Fancy goods of Jute
Making T shirt

Making Leather Goods
Making Goods from Shell
Bakery

Making Flour

Making Oil for Cooking

2025
2025

Self-employment

3]

« Boat Making « Producing Food Products
© Drying Fish *« Making Knitting Goods
e Making Flour trom Potato « Embroidery
# Making Mat from Jute * Yarning
« Making Utensils * Making Toys of woods
¢ Making Banana Chips e Printing & Publishing
¢ Making Potato Chips ¢ Making Plastic Goods
¢ Repairing Bi-cycle « Making things from Bee wax
* Making Toys « Jewelry
¢ Making Rubber Goods and Ball | * Snacks Making
* Cultivating Rubber « Making Cake (Pitha)
* Butter Making « Making Cornflakes
* Pen (Ball point) Making * Making Toothpick from Bamboo
e Processing of Hay & Woods
0 Rénasing Uwe « Making Ice Cream Spoon
. . e Pad Thresher
° Making Breycles * Making Agricultural Instruments
® Growing Vegetables © Making Phota Frame
e Photostat Business
Activity-3: Select any ten of the above mentioned areas

chronologically according to your choice:

Op oo) 2) oh

ta} fa} ual pa] ee

32 Business Entrepreneurship

Process of aiming before self-employed profession

Before selecting self-employment as a profession, one should properly specify
his‘her goal. To set the objectives, following question is necessary to be
answered:

What is your long term goal? How do you want to achieve this?
In what specific date you want to achieve this?
_What is your short term goal?
Why is short term goal important?
Have you taken any steps to achieve that’?
What obstacles can rise against achieving the goal?
How to overcome those obstacles?
What is your plan to solve problems?
What are the helps/supports necessary to solve the problem?
Whom will you select as the helper?

The correct goal can be identified within finding the answer of the questions.

Factors to be Considered for Selecting Suitable Field for Self-employment

The success or failure of a self-employed business depends largely on selecting
a suitable field for self-employment. Thus, selecting the suitable field for
self-employment, the following issues peed to be considered:

« Selecting the Right Goods

Selecting the appropriate goods for business is the pre-requisites for getting
success. Before selecting the product, demand and acceptability of the
product in the market should be properly justified.

- Initial Capital Utilizing

To run the business successfully, it is necessary to arrange sufficient fixed
and working capital. Utilizing the maximum capacity of the business is
not possible if one fails to assess and arrange necessary capital. For lack of
working capital many industries in Bangladesh cannot run to their
maximum capacity.

2025
Self-employment 33

e Assessing the Demand for Goods
The perfect measurement of demand for goods through market research and
other techniques is one of the major preconditions for success of business.
Besides, market size and marketing strategics must be assessed beforehand.

e¢ Experience and Education
The past experience in business and proper education regarding
management is helpful towards success of business. Research shows that in
most of the cases the reason for failure in business is having no prior
experience or knowledge about management strategies.

e Awareness about Self Weakness
Troubles in business can be avoided if the entreprencur is alert and
aware of his/her strength and weakness.

e Joint Effort
Family support and joint effort is a significant element to achieve
success in business. Joint ventures are more successful.

* Selecting Right Worker
The worker to be employed in business must be qualified and efficient in
their own job. So, in case of recruiting worker, their academic qualification,
professional efficiency, trust worthiness must be justified on the 'basis of a
yardstick. There should be an arrangement for traming for the employed
workers. The employee should not be recruited for emotional reasons.

e Selecting the Place of Business
To select the place fora business, raw materials availability, marketing
opportunity, infrastructural facility etc. should be considered specially.

e Uses of Right Technology
The use of right technology in the production process and combination of
local and imported technology increases the possibility of success. The
entrepreneurs should provide special emphasis on this before starting a
business.

* To be Aware of the Socio-economic and Political Condition of
the Country
The economic condition influences the success of a business. Small
entrepreneurs have to assess the existing socio-economic condition of the
country and have to take business decision on the basis of the assessment
continuously. More over, entrepreneur should always be aware of the
influencing elements of business to become successful in business.

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10. Forma-5
34 Business Entrepreneurship

« To Find Ways to Face Business Risk
Business can be protected from uncertain risk if the business related risk
is assessed beforehand. Thus, assessing the business risk with a suitable
method and face those risk with a predefined way, are the pre-conditions
for success in business.

« Take Lessons from Failure
One should not get frustrated for failure in a business rather he/she must
analyze the reasons meticulously and start in anew way. The success of
business lies within learning from the previous business failure and
execution of the learning.

¢ Proper Business Planning

Proper business planning is another important issue to be successful in
business. Planning is thinking and specification of how, what and when
to do things before starting the business. Planning is the guiding paper
for operating the business. ‘The richer the planning the more will be the
possibility of success in business.

Activity-4: Now, try to match with your selection of self-employment
areas and the above mentioned issues. Considering these issues,
select any five from your selected ten areas and give reasons:

Name of the Area Reasons for Selection

|
2
3
4

a

Ways to Motivate for Self-employment

For self-employment it is necessary to have personal efficiency and strong
willingness to earn a living on the basis of a self dependent profession. Self
employment is the only alternative since job opportunity is limited and
employments can not be generated through private and public initiative in huge
number. Concept of self-employment is not clear and sufficient to the youth of
this country. On the other hand, we think job is the only way of earning a living

20235
2025

Self-employment 35

because of our social value and bookish knowledge. As a result, the number of
both educated and illiterate unemployed people is increasing day by day. To
motivate the youth and the future generation for self-employment necessary
steps have to be taken, such as-

* Students should be taught that no work is small or disrespectful

* Students to be lectured on the biography of successful self-employed
persons of the locality.

® List of suitable areas for self-employment tobe advertized over schools
and union porished.

® The students who are dropped out or can not come to school regularly,
should be trained in a suitable area and arrangement should be made for
lending money to them.

« Sufficient vocational, technical and work oriented subject needs to be
included in the secondary and higher secondary level.

« Youth development bank and education bank needs to be established
for lending money to unemployed people for self-employment.

e Ex students of the school who are now successful entrepreneur and
business man, they should be invited for giving reception on their success.

Necessity of Training in Self-employment

Training is necessary for completing a special job and enhancement of
knowledge and efficiency. Traiming increases work efficiency and competency.
Training should be arranged in small organization to increase the efficiency
level of the worker like the large organization. It is not necessary to recruit from
outside if the existing workers have proper training and the business farm has
proper recruitment policy. Training is a continuous and regular effort to enhance
the knowledge and efficiency of workers so that their competency increases
gradually and the organization is benefited trainmg should be arranged for a
worker before assigning him/her to any job. Training is necessary for old and
new worker of the organization including the entrepreneur. Necessity of training
is explained below:

® Introduction to Nature of work and Environment
It is necessary for the newly appointed staffs to be introduced with the
working environment and nature of work of the organization. Training
process helps the new workers to get introduced with the work
environment,
36 Business Entrepreneurship

« Removes the lacking of Efficient and Experienced Worker
It is not possible for the organization to recruit experienced and educated
worker all the time. For this reason, after recruitment this necessity is
fulfilled by training the new workers. In this way the lack of efficient and
experienced workers of the institute is removed.

* Increase the Efficiency of the Worker
Training increases the work efficiency of the worker. For this. traming 1s
necessary for the new worker as well as old workers in the organization.In
this way demand of Skilled and experienced workers can be met in the
organisations.

« Proper Utilization of Resources
Training develops the efficiency of the entrepreneur and workers. As a
result better use of machineries, furniture and fixtures and other assets are
possible by the entrepreneur and workers.

« Enhancement of Moral Strength
Training enhances the morality of the entrepreneur and workers. As a
result moral strength increases, Training brings cooperation and
coordination among workers. For this, activities of the organization run
with optimum level of pace.

¢ Minimize Wastage and Accident

Trained worker can perform any job with higher efficiency and low cost.
As a result wastage is reduced in the working process in the organization.
Training gives the worker knowledge of security related various
techniques and it helps to avoid accidents of using machineries and other
factors.
At last, it can be said that the necessity for training is immense for the
development of work through efficiency and competency of the worker to
maintain the activities of the organization properly. Without proper training,
satisfactory work can not be expected from Staffs/worker, whether old or new.

So, making the worker efficient through training is a must for doing their job
for an organization.

Training Institutes for Helping Self-employment

Society or country with large number of entrepreneur is more developed. In
Bangladesh, there are some institutions for supporting self-employment. These
institutions create opportunity of earning for the destitute people through
motivating landless and ‘poor to selfemployment, providing training for

£023
2025

Sell-employment 37

efficiency enhancement, arranging micro credit to set up small business, and
monitoring of uses of the borrowed fund etc, Among the institutions Bangladesh
Institute of Bank Management, Ministry of Women Affairs, Bangladesh Rural
Development Board, Employment Generation Project of Rural Women, Youth
Traming Center, Notrams etc. are mentionable. The activities of these
organizations are mentioned below:

1. Bangladesh Institute of Management (BIM)

Bangladesh Institute of Management is an independent organization under
Ministry of Industry. This institution gives training on self-employment and
entrepreneurship development in exchange of specific fees. The major
programs include Process of Setting up Small Industry and Management,
Establishing New Industry, Development of Women Entrepreneur etc.

2. Ministry of Women Affairs

Ministry of women Affairs mainly undertakes various acnvities for the
development of women. Mainly, the major objective of this institution is to
generate employment for the destitute, uneducated and half educated village
women. It provides informal training on technical and technological issues
towards the motivated women for the development of their technical
efficiency.

3. Bangladesh Rural Development Board

Bangladesh Rural Development Board (BRDB) provides vocational training
to the destitute and landless village people for self-employment, so that they
can select a profession independently to earn a living. ‘The activities of BRDB
cover all the districts and Upazillas.

A Self-dependent Woman by availing loan from BRDB
3a Business Entrepreneurship

4. Employment Generation Project of Rural Women

Through this project, the rural women are provided with training and loan is
extended to the trained women, Only the trained are eligible to avail the loan facility.

5. Youth Training Center

Youth Training Center is operated by the Ministry of Youth & Sports. It has
center at every Upazila of the country. From these centers training on various
professions are provided to the unemployed youths, Such as establishing poultry
farm, Fish Cultivation, Vegetable Gardening, Nursery, Sewing, Cottage
Industry, Computer Operation etc. The trainees can enjoy the opportunity of
self-employment after getting training In these sectors.

5. NOTRAMS

Notrams is an institution operated
by the Ministry of Education. The
main job of this institution is to
provide training on computer
programming and computer
operation. A number of young
boys and girls have become self-
employed after having been
trained from this institution. In fine,
it can be said that the above A old woman engage in self-employment
mentioned organizations play a helping role in generating self-employment by
arranging training programmes. The economy of the country is being developed
as a resull of their activities.

6. NGO’S:

At present different NGO’S in the country are providing training to the unemployed

youth about life and life skills.
For example : BRAC, Ahsania Mission, ASTA ete.

At last we can say that the institutions discussed above are playing a helpful role
for creating self-employment through various training activities. The result of
their activities is developing the economy of the country.

2025
2025

Self-employment 39

EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)

|, Total number of unemployed people in Bangladesh as per report of
Bangladesh Statistical Bureau -2010?

a. Six Lac b. Sixteen Lac
c. Twenty Six Lac d. Thirty Six Lac

2. In selecting suitable area for self-employment it is needed to consider -

i. Right Product
ii. Certainty of Profit
iii. Demand for Goods

Which one of the following is correct ?

a. i & ii b. i & ill

c. i & ill d.i, i & ui
Give answer to the question No. 3 & 4 after reading the following
paragraph:

SSC pass Shikha is expert in computer. She teaches computer to some of the
girls at her house. Day by day, number of her students is increasing. She is will-
ing to have higher/better training on computer so that she can take this area as
self-employment.

3, From which of the organization Shikha can take training?
a. BIRDB b. BIM
c. BIBM d. Notrams

4. Why it ts logical to select the mentioned werk of Shikha as a way of
self- employment by her in future?

a. Social status is good b. Market demand is good
c. Request from the students d. Expertise in Computer
4) Business Entrepreneurship

Creative question

1. Oishee, Sadi and Sami; three friends have completed B.Com recently. They
were discussing about their future planning. Oishee and Sadi is planning to get
admitted in M.Com. Sami can not make a final decision yet. Because, his father
wants hin to go to any country of Middle East. But, meritorious Sarai wants to
do something staying in the country. He took a two months training on poultry
farming. It strengthens his mentality. He set up a poultry farm in his house with
the money for abroad. He is now self dependent utilizing the knowledge he
gained from the training.

a. What is the contribution of Agricultural sector in the national economy?

b. Why unemployment problem in Bangladesh is increasing? Explain.

c. Establishing poultry farm by Sami is included in what type of work? Explain.

d. What quality of Sami do you think has influenced him most te become
self dependent — Explain this statement.

2.School Teacher of Rangamati Mrs. Mamapru Marma gave the idea about the
huge demand and potentiality of clothes made by handloom to local tanti Marina
Marma. Considering the vast demand, Marina started to make Thami -a cloth for
the hilly girls and prospered rapidly by selling them. Because of Marina, several
girls became employed. She has been declared the Best Women Entrepreneur for
the last three years in her district,

a. What is the percentage of the boys and girls of the total eligible work force of
the country’?

b. Describe one feature of Self-employment?

c. Which matter played the role for rapid prosperity of Marina? Explain.

d. “Following the advice of Mamapru Marma has brought so much
acknowledgement in Marina Marma’s life.” Explain the line in your own

words,

2025
