Chapter Eleven
Reproduction in Organism

Reproduction is a basic characteristic of living organisms. Organisms give rise
to other organisms of the same kind to continue generations, The process of the
reproduction of different organism can be different. Plant and human
reproduction is to be discussed in this chapter.

2025
£23

explain the concept and significance of reproduction in organisms;
describe the functions of a flower as a reproductive organ;

explain sexual reproduction in plants with the life cycle of flowering plants;
explain the asexual and sexual reproduction of animals;

explain the nature of reproduction:

make differences between external and internal reproduction;

describe the steps of human reproduction with the help of block picture;
explain the role of hormones in reproduction;

explain the development of embryos;

explain the mode of transmission, prevention and remedy of AIDS in the
human body;

explain the preventive measures of AIDS on the resistance of body;

draw the poster and leaflet describing the prevention of AIDS;

show sympathy towards AIDS patient.
11.1 Concept of reproduction in organism and its significance

Death is inevitable. If only death occurred, organisms would become extinct.
But this does not because, on one hand, organisms are dying, on the other hand.
organisms are reproducing. Reproduction is a physiological activity through
which organisms continue their existence by producing offspring. The process
by which the organism reproduces their offspring is called reproduction.
Reproduction is of two types: asexual and sexual, In most lower organisms,
sexual reproduction does not occur but some of the lower organism reproduces
by sexual reproduction. Most higher plants and all higher animals produce
offspring through sexual reproduction.

In sexual reproduction, two opposite reproductive cells are fused. In this case,
one is called the male reproductive cell or sperm, and the other is called the
female reproductive cell or ovum. In higher plants, there are two types of
reproductive cells produced in the same body. These are monoecious plants.
When two types of reproductive cells are produced in separate bodies, these
plants are called dioecious plants.

The precondition of developing any reproductive cell is that the germinal mother
cell will have to divide through meiosis. As a result, the number of
chromosomes in a reproductive cell becomes half of the mother cell. The
zygote develops by fusing one male gamete with one female gamete and thus the
number of chromosomes becomes the same as the mother cell. Later, the zygote
divideds repeatedly through mitosis to develop the new body of the newly born
organism. In this way, an organism gives birth to many organisms. An organism
this way also maintains the flow of its future generations.

If reproduction did not occur in organisms, they would be extinct. From a
bacterium up to human beings, all organisms maintain the existence of their
species by reproducing. How an organism accomplishes its reproduction
depends on the characteristics of the organism. ‘This is why a lower organism
does reproduction through cell division, while an organism of a higher level
accomplishes reproduction through the complex process of sexual
reproduction. Though sexual reproduction isa complicated, laborious and time
consuming process in comparison to asexual reproduction, it has still taken a

“
3

Py
2025

place in evolution. Due to meiotic cell division it would is easy to get gene

variation from one generation to the next. We have seen in the third chapter and
will see in chapter twelve and thirteen that this variation is very helpful tor the
existence of any species in unfavorable environmenta! conditions. On the other
hand through asexual reproduction the daughter cells produced are exactly the
same as the mother cell, so very little variety is seen. Comparatively, in simpler
living organisms such as Bacteria, Protozoa etc. reproduction is possible in large
number using very little time and little energy, so asexual reproduction still
exists.

11.2 Plant Reproduction

11.2.1 Reproductive organ: Flower

A flower is a special type of modified shoot for reproduction. A flower is the
reproductive organ of a higher plant. We know that two (androecium and
gynoecium) of the five whorls of a flower are very significant for reproduction.
They directly take part in the reproduction. Though other parts or whorls of a
flower do not directly take part in reproduction, they help the process. The
flowers, which have five whorls, are called complete flowers, such as- China
rose, datura. If a flower lacks any of the five whorls, it is called an incomplete
flower. such as- bottle gourd, pumpkin. The flowers, which have pedicel, are
called sessile flower, such as- China rose, pumpkin and those which have no
pedicel, are called non-sessile flower, such as- Indian heliotrope. When both the
androecium and the gynoecium are present in a flower, it is called a bisexual
flower, such as- China rose, datura. If the androectum or gynoecium is absent,
this flower is called unisexual flower, such as- bottle gourd, pumpkin. If both the
androecium and gynoecium are absent in a flower, it is called a neuter flower.

Different parts of a flower

(a) Thalamus: This is usually round and is developed at the tip of a floral axis.
The other parts or whorls of a flower are arrayed consecutively on the floral axis
one after the other.

(b) Calyx: The outermost whorl of a flower is called the calyx.Each of the part
of calyx ts called a sepal. If the sepal of the calyx are not separated, it is called
samosepalous/aposepalous. If the sepals are separated, it is called polysepalous.

The green calyx takes part in the production of food. Their main function is to
save the inner parts of a flower from the sun, rain and attack of insects and pests.
When the calyx is of different colours, it plays important roles in pollination, and
it attracts different animals such as insects, birds etc. as the medium of
accomplishing pollution.

(c) Corolla: It is the outermost but one whorl of a flower. If the corolla is
segmented, each segment is then called a petal. If the petals in a corolla are
separate from each other, the term polypetalous is used then. In case of having
sepals wholly or partially fused, they are called gamopetalous. Corolla are
usually colourful. They protect the internal parts of a flower from the sun and
rain, Bright colourful corolla attract animals- birds, insects etc., and helps
pollination. Sometimes insects draw nectar from the corolla of a flower. The
purpose of pollination is served when the carriers complete these activities.

Petal

Gynoecium her

Stamen

be’ Filament

Sepal

Floral axis

Pedicel

Figure: 11.01 Different parts of a Mower

2025
2025

(d) Androecium: I[t is the third whorl from outside of a flower, and it is an

essential whorl, Every part of an androectum is called a stamen, In an
androecium, there may be one or more stamens. Each stamen has two parts. ‘he
stalk like structure of stamen is called the filament and the sac like apical
structure of it is called the anther. The part of a stamen. which connects the
anther to the filament, 1s called connective, Pollens are developed in an anther.A
pollen tube is produced from a pollen after germination. The male gamete is
produced in the pollen tube. The male gametes directly take part in reproduction,
In some plants, the filaments may be connected to cach other, and sometimes the
anthers may combine with each other. When the stamens are merged together
with all the filaments into a tube like group, it is called a monadelphous, such as
in Chinese hibiscus. If the filaments are attached with two groups, it is called a
diadelphous such as pea and when in many groups, it ts called a polydelphous,
such as cotton tree (Salmalia malabarica), When anthers are united into a single
group, it is called syngenesious. The state of being of the stamen free of
attachment to corolla, the androecium, is called epipetalous, such as in Datura.

A B Cc D E

Fig: 11.02 Different types of stamen: a. Monodelphous b. Diadelphous,
¢. Polydelphous d. Syngenesious e. Epipetalous

(ce) Gynoecium: The gynoecium is at the centre of a flower. It is another
essential whorl of a flower. A gynoecium may be structured with one or more
carpels. A carpel has three parts, the ovary, style and stigma, When a gynoecium
is formed with many more carpels which are completely merged with each other,
then it is called, syncarpous and when they are separated, it is called polyearpous.
One or more ovules are in a flower, arranged inside of the ovary. Within the
ovule, the female reproductive cell (ovum) is produced. This ovum, like an
androecium, is directly involved in the process of reproduction.

~ Activity : Observation of different whorls of a flower.
Elements: a flower, blade, forceps, and blotting paper.
Procedure: Collect a flower and seperate the different parts of a flower, placing
them on a blotting paper:

Activity : Observation of the transverse section of ovary.

Elements: A mature flower, blade and simple microscope.

Procedure: Separate the ovary from a flower. Observe it under a simple
microscope and write down what you have seen.

Inflorescence: All of you have seen inflorescence. Clusters of flowers arranged
in a branch of a tree, is called inflorescence.

Youngest flower.

Oldest flower

ea Youngest flower

Oldest flower <<

(a) (b)

Figure: 11.03 (a) Indefinite inflorescence (Recemose)
(b) Definite inflorescence (Cymose)

225
The axis on which flowers are orderly arranged is called peduncle. If the growth
of this axis is unlimited, it is called indefinite inflorescence (recemose), and in
case of limited prowth of the axis it is called definite inflorescence (cymose). An
inflorescence plays important roles in pollination. Two consecutive steps occur
in reproduction- pollmation and fertilization. Discussion regarding this are
given below.

11.2.2 Pollination

Pollination is also called the linking of pollen, Pollination is a precondition for
the development of fruits and seeds. The transfer of pollen from the anther to the
stigma of the same flower or to the stigma of another plant of the same species
is pollination. Pollination is of two types, self-pollination and crass- pollination.

(a) Self-pollination: On the same flower or on two flowers of the same plant,
transfer of pollen can occur. This is called self-pollination. For
example- brassica, cucumber and datura usually pollinate through this way.

Wastage of pollen is less, the process is not dependent on a carner, and the
occurrence of pollination is ensured. The plant that develops in this way cannot
make changes to their characters, and so the features of the species can be
maintained. This way, a species can maintain purity. No new characters appear
in the new generation of plants. The newly born plants breed seeds with less
vigour. The ability of adaptation in the new plant is reduced,which means this

species can become extinct. ain

% en
(b) Cross-pollination : When the Cross-pollination - ja

attachment of pollen occurs in between

two distinct flowers of the same
species, it is called cross-pollination,
such as, cotton tree (Salmalia
malabarica), papayas (Carica papaya)
pollinate this way.

Figure: | 1.04 Self-pollination and

“ross-pollinati
Forma-30, Biology Class-9-10 a
234 Biology

New characters emerge through cross-pollination. The rate of germination goes up
and much more vigorous seeds are produced through this way of pollination. As
the pollination occurs in between two different plants, the seed produced this way
is born with new characteristics. The plant, which grows from that seed, also has
new characteristics. This is why new varieties of those plants emerge. As it is a
carrier dependent process, pollination is not ensured and large waste of pollen is a
consequence of this type of pollination. So, the purity of the species Is impaired.

Medium of pollination

In most cases, a medium accomplishes the
transfer of pollen. The carrier which carries pollen,
is called the pollen carrier. Air, water, insects and
flies, birds, vampires, snails and even humans may
be the media of pollination. To consume nectar
from a flower or after attraction to the charming
colour of the flower, the carriers travel from one
flower to another. When the carrier sits on the

flower, the pollen attaches to it. To obtain the aid of
Figure: 11.05 Entemophillic

a the carrier, some plant adaptations are remarkable.

Insect pollinated flowers are big, with coloured nectar secreting glands. In these
flowers, pollen and stigmas are sticky and have fragrance. For example, hibiscus,
gourd, mustard etc. Air pollinated flowers are light weight and do not have nectar
secreting glands. The flower has no
fragrance, can easily wander in the air. Their
stigmas are branched and sticky, and
sometimes feathery. Branched stigmas will
attain pollens from the air. For example,
Oryza sativa.

Figure: 11.06 zoophillic flower

2025
£23

Water pollinated plants are small and lightweight, so that they can float in the
water. They have no fragrance. The petiole in the female flower is longer than
that of the male. Mature male flowers, detached from the petioles, float in the
water and after coming in contact with the female flowers, they accomplish
pollination, for example, Va/lisnaria.

Animal pollinated flowers are usually large in size. If they are small, they are
arranged in the inflorescence. They have attractive colours. Fragrance may be
present or absent in them. For example, Kadam, cotton tree (shimul) and taro.

Microsporogenesis

A pollen is the first cell of a gametophyte. Pollen mother cell (2n) produces four
daughter pollen cells (n) by meiosis. Soon after becoming mature harbouring in
the pollen sac pollen starts to germinate. The nucleus of the pollen gets divided
through mitotic division and two cells, one large and another small, are formed.
The large one is called the tube cell and the small one is called the generative
cell. The tube cell turns into the pollen tube and two male gametes are produced.
Division of the generative cell takes place in the pollen or pollen tube.

_ Generative Nucleus
Exne

Pollen ie \: A

Yio
Tube Nucleus

(i r/ Nia é gamete
haw?
Figure: | 1.07 Different stages of the development of male gametophyte

Megasporogenesis

Near the micropyle of the nucellus tissue being nourished in the nucellus of an
ovule, a cell starts to become larger. Its protoplasm is dense and the nucleus is
comparatively large. The cell divides into four haploid cells through meiotic
division. Every cell, except the lowest one, gets disintegrated. Growing gradually,
this larger cell matures into an embryo sac. The nucleus of the cell is haploid.

The nucleus divides and produces two nucleus. These two nuclei take positions
in two opposing poles, Next, these two nuclei consecutively divide twice and
result in four nuclei,

Four Three
Megaspore  *888Pare pain
Mother cell eg

Antipedal cell

Secondary Nucleus
Egg
Synergid cell

Figure: 11,08 Different stages of the development of female gametophyte

In the next stage, fvo nuclei from the two poles come to the middle of the cell
and get fused to cause the emergence of two haploid secondary nuclei. The
nuclei in the two poles turn into cells with some amount of cytoplasm.
Collectively, the combined structure of the three cells near the micropyle is
called the egg apparatus. In between the cells, the one occupying the middle
place is the ovum, which is a little larger. This is called an egg cell and the other
two are called synargid cells. The cells in the opposite pole to the egg apparatus
are called antipodal cells. This is how the process of developing the embryo sac
is done.

11.2.3 Fertilization

Through pollination, the mature pollen lands on stigma of a carpel. Then the
pollen tube grows, penetrating the style and absorbs some liquid. Once the tips
of the extended pollen tube enter the embryo, it ejects two male gametes into the
embryo sac. One of them, meeting with the egg, causes the emergence of a
zygote. The other male gamete, mixing with the secondary nuclei, develop
triploid endosperm cells.

2025
2025

Sporaphyte

Pollen |

mother cell (2ny J (Meiosis) /
Embryosae Four Daughter [ Mitosis |
Pollen cell or + -
microspore{n) —
Daughter + [Mitosis} Embryosac

Pollen tube Pollen call or

Hen grain (aj)

Figure: 11.09 Life cycle of flowering plant

The two fusions, mixing of a male gamete with an egg and mixing of another
male gamete with secondary nuclei, take place at about the same time. This
phenomenon is called double fertilization.

Development of new sporophyte

A zygote is the first cell of a sporophyte. Two cells are produced after its first
division. At the same time, the flourishing of the endosperm is also initiated. A
zygote divides transversely. The cell towards the micropyle is called the basal
cell and the cell towards the centre of the embryo sac is called the apical cell. The
division of these two cells continues simultaneously. Gradually, the apical cell
turns into the embryo. The suspensor also gets developed concurrently. The
cotyledon, radicle and plumule are developed one after another and the
secondary nuclei start to make the endosperm. The cells in an endosperm are
triploid, meaning they posses three sets of chromosomes (3n). At maturity, the
ovule with the endosperm and embryo turns into a seed. As the seed germinates,

a complete sporophyte is developed.

Chalaza
Stigma

Pollen tube

Nucollus tissue

Antipodal cell

Secondary nucleus

Eribryosac

Beg

Synergid cell

Taner membrane
Outer membrane

| Microphyle

Hilum

Funicwlus

Figure: 11.10 Structure of ovule and fertilization

Ovule

Overy

Male gamete

The sporophyte and gametophyte run in a repeating way one after another
through the life cycle of a flowering plant,

Origin of fruits: When we think about fruits, the images of mango, Jackfruit,
lichi, banana, grape, apple, guava, sofeda etc. appear in our mind. Bottle Gourd,
Gourd, Ridge Gourd, pointed gourd are also fruits, though, they are called vegetables.
In fact, they are all fruits. The process of the formation of fruits begins
immediately after the completion of fertilization. Fertilization initiates
stimulation in the ovary to develop fruits steadily and ultimately, ovules are
turned into seeds. The ovary after fertilization turns into the fruits. If only the
ovary tums into a [ruit, itis called a true fruit. Mango and berries are examples
of true fruits. When along with the ovary, other parts of a flower get mature

2023
2025

this type of fruit is called false fruit. Apples, Elephant Apple (Chalita) are the
examples of false fruit. All the true and false fruits are grouped into three
categories: fleshy fruit, aggregate fruit and compound fruit.

11.3 Animal Reproduction

Reproduction is of two types in animal kingdom. (1) Asexual reproduction and
(2) Sexual reproduction.

Asexual reproduction : Asexual reproduction happens in lower animals. Asexual
reproduction occurs in different ways, such as - budding, binary fission,
fragmentation etc.

Sexual reproduction : The process through which two animals of opposite sex
(male and female) complete their reproduction by means of producing male and
female gametes, fertilizes and produce offspring is called sexual reproduction.

11.3.1 Fertilization

Fertilization is necessary for sexual reproduction. It is a universal biological
process. In sexual reproduction the fusion of sperm and ovum is called
fertilization. During sexual reproduction active sperm penetrates into the ovum,
and the two nuclei fuse together, The cell formed by the fusion of the nuclei is
the zygote. It requires some time for fertilization. Fach of the sperm and ovum
contains a haploid number of chromosome, and each of them carries one set of
chromosome. Due to fertilization zygote is produced, which is a diploid new cell
(it carries two sets of chromosomes). The maturity of sperm and ovum is a
precondition of fertilization.

Fertilization is a special process. It happens only with the matured sperm and ovum
of the same species. Generally fertilization is unchangeable. Once an ovum is
fertilized, it will not fertilize again. On the basis of the place of occurrence,
fertilization is divided into two types. (1) External reproduction and (2) Internal
reproduction.

(a) External fertilization ; If the fertilization takes place outside the body of
male and female animals. it is known as external reproduction. This type of
fertilization occurs in most aquatic animals, such as, different types of fishes.
But there are exceptions, such as: sharks and some other species of fishes.
(b) Internal fertilization ; The fertilization which takes place inside the
reproductive organ of the female is called internal reproduction. This fertilization
occurs introducing sperms of the male into the female reproductive organ. It is
one of the characteristic of most of the terrestrial animals.

The basic significance of fertilization : Restoration of the number of diploid
chromosomes within the embryo accumulates hereditary characters of both the
male and female, and makes the ovum active for its development. Chromosomes
carry the characteristics of both the father and mother. These characteristics
combine, determining the sex of the embryo. The picture shows the steps of the
gamete formation.

Male reproductive

mother cell Meiosis

Female
reproductive mother
cell

Figure 11.1] Different stages of reproduction (block Picture)
For continuity and restoration of hereditary, reproduction is essential. This process
includes formation of the embryo and giving birth to offspring. Humans are
unisexual, so male and female reproductive organs are present in different
individuals.
11.3.2 Role of hormone in human reproduction
You have learned that a hormone is a type of organic substance, secreted from
ductless glands. It acts as a chemical messenger and is transported all over the
body through the blood, to help in chemical reactions and control different
metabolic and physiological processes.

f025
Specific but very small amount of hormone secrets and regulates various
physiological activities. If the secretion of hormone is much more or less than
the specific amount then it hampers the various activities of the body, As a result,
different type of abnormality of the body arises. Reproductive hormones
secreted from endocrine glands within the body are described below.
(1) Pituitary gland (2) Thyroid gland (3) Adrenal gland (4) Testis (5) Ovary
(6) Placenta.

The growth stimulating hormone and the producer hormone are produced by the
pituitary gland, These hormones regulate growth of reproductive glands
secretions and functions, and controls mammary gland and mill secretion. These
hormones also regulate the contraction of uterus. The thyroid glands secrete
thyroxine hormone. This regulates metabolic function, and ensures physical and
mental development, and sexual characteristics. Hormones secreted from the
adrenal gland regulate development of the reproductive organs, and exposition of
sexual characteristics. Testosterone hormone secreted [rom the testis and
androgen help to produce sperms and secondary sexual characteristics, such as:
deepening of the voice and growth of a beard. The ovary secretes estrogen,
progesterone, and relaxin hormones. These hormones cause the development of
sexual characteristics, such as: menstruation, enlargement of the well of uterus for
implantation of the embryo and placenta. It also has a particular role in the
formation of the ovum. Gonadotropic and progesterone of placenta stimulates
ductless glands of the ovary and helps in enlargement of mammary glands.

When the baby is born their reproductive system remains immature. Children
pass childhood to become adolescents. The transitional period of adolescence
and youth is named puberty, At that time secondary sexual characteristics
develop. Organs of the reproductive system grow and develops. Hormones play
an Important role in this respect. Both mmner and outer changes occur, such as:
growth of beard on the face, deepening of the yoice, widening of shoulder etc.
are the external changes in males.

During puberty the changes within the girls are - softness in skin, loveliness in
appearance etc. In this stage of puberty usually monthly discharge of blood or

menses from the uterus begins at regular intervals. This is the menstrual cycle or
Forma-31, Biology Class-9-10
menstruation. After 1-2 years of puberty girls gain the ability to
reproduction. Then they begin to produce ovum from the female reproductive
mother cell within the ovary, This continues up to 40-50 years. After that,
cessation of the menstrual cycle occurred permanently. Then it is called
menopause. The menstrual cycle remains temporarily stopped during
pregnancy. Six weeks after child birth it starts again.

Mariage is a social, spiritual and family tie. A family is formed by the efforts of a
husband and wife’s adjustment through marriage. They become intimate with each
other. A relation of love, affection and attachment develops between them. There
should be a specific minimum age for getting married. Before 20 years, a female
should not marry. Early marriage causes a girl to become pregnant in immature
age. There is every possibility of harm for both mother and the baby.

Sexual reproduction occurs through physical relationship between husband
and wife. Durimg physical contact, the sperm of male enters the female
reproductive organ. A sperm has a tail which helps it to swim into the female
reproductive system. The fusion of sperm and egg nucleus occurs within the
oviduct. This fusion is called fertilization. An egg (ovum) is fertilized with a
single sperm only. In this way, internal fertilization occurs within the human
body. Each of the sperm and ovum contains one set of chromosomes (haploid),
By the fusion of these haploid sperm and ovum, a diploid zygote is formed,

11.3.3 Development of the embryo

The fertilized egg gradually passes along the oviduct to the uterus. Immediately
after fertilization, cell division begins in the zygote. This is called cleavage. At the
last stage of cleavage, the growing embryo arrives in the uterus, At this stage, this
mass of cells of the growing embryo is called a blastocyst. The changes that
happens in the uterus are very important for the development of the embryo.

For the development of next stage of blastocyst the embryo has to be embedded in
the inner wall of the uterus. So the blastocyst becomes embedded with the uterine
wall. This process is called implantation. Imbecded in the uterus, the embryo
grows and turns into a human body. Time between implantation and child birth is
called pregnancy. At that time menstruation or menstrual cycle does not occur, The
embryo or fetus develops in the uterus for 38-40 weeks.

2025
£23

Placenta ; The special organ through which the fetus in the uterus is connected
to the tissue of the mother is called the placenta. Implantation is completed
within 4-5 days after the embryo reaches the uterus. Some cells of the
developing embryo along with the endoderm of the uterus compose an oval
shaped and blood vessel enriched placenta. The placenta is formed within twelve
weeks of zygote formation. In this way a temporary unseparated organ is formed
between the fetus and endoderm of mother's uterus. At the time of child birth the
placenta is eliminated from the body.

Agtery (food and
oxygensied blood carrier)
in unibilical cord
Transmission of CO, and
other waste product in
mother’s blood

The chamber is filled
with pregnant mother’s blood.

Artery m unibilical cord
carrier of waste product,
Vein in umbilical cord

(food and oxygenatid blood carriez)

Fluid that protects the
embryo from mpury

Figure 11.12 Placenta and Embryo in mother’s uterus

The embryo is implanted into the uterine wall with the help of the placenta. The
embryo needs food for its growth. Carbohydrate, (glucose), protein (amino
acid), essential minerals, water etc, are transferred from maternal to fetal blood
to nourish the developing embryo. The placenta acts more or less like a lung.
The dissolved oxygen in the blood of the maternal blood diffuses into the fetal
blood and exchanges carbon dioxide from the fetus to the mother. The placenta
also acts as kidney; metabolic waste product ts diffused from the embryonic
blood capillaries into the mother's blood stream. In this way the waste products
are eliminated. The placenta produces some important hormones which protect
the embryo and helps in normal development.

Placenta contains a.huge amount of blood capillaries. The embryo is attached to
the placenta by a tube called the umbilical cord. It is a tube through which the
exchange of different materials occur between mother and fetus. At the time of
pregnancy, it secretes some hormones which helps to produce milk and facilitate
child birth.

Foetal membrane : The embryos of each species have a series of embryonic
membranes which are essential for easy, normal and safe development of the
embryo. These help in fetus nutrition, gaseous exchange and elimination of
waste products. The embryonic membrane protects the fetus (embryo) and
controls other important action.

36 Hours Later 72 Hours Later 4 Weeks Later

Twa Cells ey

21 ee oie ef 3, 16 cells structure after 4, Afetr four weeks the embryo is
1. Fertilization of — 2. Cell division of fertilized egg approximately 72. hours, floating in a fluid-filled sac,
sperm and ovauin afterapproximately 36 hows. Inq few days, the ball of cells The heart is beating and the

Spema cell
Penetrats the ege

will settle in the urerus: brain has started to develop,
5 Weeks Later 8 Weeks Later 28 Weeks Later 38 Weeks Later
—_ Umbilical card

5. Afier approximately $ weeks, 6. After 8 weeks, the embryo 7. After 28 weeks, ihe foetus is 8. About 38 weeks after
the growth of embryo is going on. called foetus, Bur the organs fully developed in the expanded feriilization, the foetua has

Tthas bud that will become are in small size. utems. moved its head downward
ame and legs. in preparation for birth,

Fig. 11.13 : Embryonic Growth and development
In humans, pregnancy lasts for an average of 40 weeks. During this time the mother's
anterior pituitary and placenta begins to secrete two hormones. These hormones
actively promote uterine contractions at regular intervals that results in pain. This
increasing pain is called labour pain. At the last stage of child birth the embroyonic
membrane bursts and fluid enclosed by the membrane comes out, and the child is born.

2025
2025

11.4 Reproduction Related diseases

11.4.1 Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS): At present AIDS is
well known as a killer disease of the world. This disease was discovered in 1981.
Taking the first letters from ‘Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome’ the
disease AIDS has been named.

According to the statistics of UNAIDS published in 2023 worldwide more than
39.9 million people are infected by AIDS. Almost 53% of the infected persons are
female. According to World Health Organization this disease is spreading in
about 164 countries. AIDS disease is caused in human body by the attack of a
virus named HIV (Human Immune Deficiency virus). This virus destroys white
blood cells, causing obstacles in antibody formation, that results in the gradual
shortage of white blood cells and antibodies. In human body this virus can
remain dormant for a long time. It destroys the victims immune system. There is
no effective medicine discovered to regain the immune system completely, so
the ultimate fate is death.

Causes of AIDS : A healthy person can be infected by this life threatening
disease in the following ways:

(i). Unprotected sexual relation or physical relation with infected males and females.

(ii). Transfusion of blood because
of blood loss due to accident.
excessive bleeding at the time of
child birth, anemia, thalassemia,
cancer etc. Transfusion of blood
from a HIV infected person to a
healthy person may transmit the (
disease. F
(ii). ATDS does not spread
directly from the AIDS affected
father. Through sexual relations
mother may be affected by AIDS
and the child of the affected Pit: 11-14 Structure of HIV

mother may be affected. A baby may be infected from an HIV-infected mother
during breast feeding,

Phospholipid layer
GP 120
GPa

Gbyeoprotein

Reverse.
trans¢riplage
(iv). The disease may transmit to a healthy person, through sharing of infected
needles, syringe, dental and surgical operation related instruments etc. Even by
using the same blade in the saloon the disease may transmit.

(v). Transplacement of HIV infected organ or tissue in the body of healthy person.

Symptoms of AIDS : Signs and symptoms of the disease are exposed 6 months
after the germs of the disease enters the body of healthy person, Then
symptoms are very negligible and after some days it disappears. After the
entrance of HIV in human body, it may remain harmless for a few months to
wears and it just Increases in number in the host body. When the number of HIV
virus becomes enormous, then suddenly the patient is in a serious condition and
there is nothing else to do for the patient. Before this, it is not easy to tell that
infected person is the carrier of this disease.

The symptoms are-

- rapid loss of body weight.

- fever for more than one month for unknown reasons.

- dry cough for prolonged period.

- pain in armpit, neck and face become rough.

- puffiness and swelling of some organs, such as : face, eyelid, nose etc.
- itching in the whole body.

Prevention of AIDS : You have learned earlier about this disease. Let us
see if we can remember it.

- What is the necessity to prevent AIDS?
- Is it possible to avoid the causes that spread the infection of the disease?

Write the measures of prevention on the black board and summarize,

() inaividuatAciviy

Activity: Form a group of 5 students and draw a poster/ leaflet regarding the

preventive measures of AIDS,
q

2025
2925

1.
2.
3.
4,
5.

(?)Exercise

Why are humans called unisexual animals?

What is the uterus? What is its necessity?

What is the placenta? What are the functions of the placenta?
What measures should be taken to prevent AIDS?

Explain the functions of hormones in reproduction.

1.
2.

Why is a flower called the reproductive organ? Describe it.
Describe the causes, symptoms and remedies of AIDS.

1. In which flower, are the stamens diadelphous?
a. Chinese hibiscus b. Pea
c. Cotton tree or shimul d, Sunflower
2. The air pollinated flower is-
i. large in size.
ii. with undivided stigma,
iii. without nectar glands.
Which one is correct?
ai&ii b. i & iii
c. i & iti d. i, i & tii
Look at the stem and answer the questions 3 and 4:

3.

Which part of the stem turns into a seed?

a. N b, 0

c.P d.Q

Which one does play a role in producing M
endosperm?

aM&Q b.M&P N
.M&N d.N&P

mp mos P

a)
b)
c)
d)

What is an embryo sac?

What does it mean by indefinite inflorescence?

Explain the problems there will be in pollination if the part P is absent.

Express your opinion how part Q protects its species.

12 years old Ridoy sings with a melodious voice. Recently with some

physical and mental changes, his voice becomes deep. So, his mother
consulted with a doctor, who said, this change is normal for children.

What is the placenta?

Why is AIDS called a fatal disease?

Explain the causes of the events happened in Ridoy's body.
Explain the role of the elders towards Ridoy at that time.

225
