CHAPTER ELEVEN

Ethics and Social Responsibilities in Business

The main objective of business is generating profit. However, it has to maintain
some ethics and social responsibilities as well. As a part of the society, the
entrepreneur and business organization has to bear in mind and uphold the idea
of social values, morality and positive attitude towards society. In this chapter,
we shall learn about the different aspects of ethics and social responsibility of a
business.

After reading this chapter, we shall be able to —

.

Explain the concept and importance of business values, and ethics
Explain the concept of social responsibilities in business.

Explain the mode of responsibility towards state, society, buyer
and worker.

Explain the features and effect of air pollution, water pollution,
sound pollution and land contamination due to business.

Identify the social responsibilities of business in preventing
environmental pollution.

Describe the various types of development works of
social responsibilities of different business.

£023
2025

Ethics in Business and Social Responsibilities 141

Concept of Business Values and Ethics

The concept of values and ethics are indispensable to each other. Value is the
wisdom and attitude of the society which is treated as valuable and eligible to be
followed by others. Values and ethics help a man to differentiate between justice
and injustice, right and wrong, good and bad, etc. It indicates the positive,
wellbeing and goodness of human life. Ethical principle means the ability to
differentiate between good and bad, justice and injustice, do's and don'ts etc. It
is really necessary to follow the ethical standard of the behavior of people to
form a happy society and country as a whole.

Ethics

The word ethics has evolved from the Greek 'Ethos' which means the standard
of human behavior. Ethics is related to our daily activities. We know that the
responsibility of a teacher is to teach the students properly. This is not the end. He
has to ensure whether the students understand the lessons, He should also look
after the attentive-inattentive students, to examine the home works of the
students and make correction if there is any mistake; all these tasks are included
in his ethical responsibilities. Like a teacher a student needs to be followed some
ethics; such as going to school in time, doing home work and follow the
ideology of the teacher. Ethics means the capacity of analyzing the good and bad
and accepting the right things. It is the part of ethics to carry out responsibilities
by the teacher and student properly.

Business Ethics

In a business there are lots of task related from the very beginning to the
operational level. To proceed with the tasks with proper, decent and correct
measures, ethics works as a guideline for this. Besides, the business ethics or
ethical value helps us to be well behaved in the business world.

Business is a social institution. A business organization is formed and
continues to meet up the demand for various goods and services for our daily
use, An entrepreneur or businessman. sells the products to the consumers with
addition of profit with the production cost or purchase price. Profit is the
difference between the selling price and buying price or selling price and
production cost. If any body creates an artificial demand for a product to gain
extra profit, then it will go against ethics. There are some ethical values in
operating a business. The pricing of the product should be fixed in such way so
that the seller can make profit along with keeping the price within the purchasing
power of the buyer. On the other hand, the business person should not supply
142 Business Entrepreneurship

such products which are harmful for the society. It means that business should
be operated through maintaining the interest of the stakeholders. Other ethics of
business are as follows:

« To maintain honesty
* Not to produce and market harmful products

* Not to cheat with the customer
e Not to sale expired product and goods
e Not to make any artificial scarcity of products
* To follow the commercial and industrial law of the state
« Not to pollute environment
* To contribute to the welfare of the society.
Necessity of Business Values and Ethics
In our country, making excessive profit and illegality in business is increasing
day by day. Ethical practice in business in Bangladesh 1s not satisfactory. Every
day we can see a lot of negative news in the dailies related to business. For
example we can say selling of dead chicken, contaminating food, producing and
selling of low quality products, cheating in weight, fish and fruits with formalin,
mixing of harmful colour in food, dangerous for health, giving false and
exaggerated information of products, using low quality of products in
construction, contaminated medicine, plying of vehicles ineligible to run on the
road, The impact of these unethical activities is severe. A number of children
have been becoming sick and dying from tainted fake medicine. People are
getting diseased from eating various poisonous foods. If this unethical activity
of businessmen is not stopped immediately; very soon we shall find ourselves in
an ailing society. The result of which will be devastating. For the following
reasons necessity of business values and ethics are immense:
1, Man is the best creation of God. Unethical activities and attitude is
not expected from them.
2. A businessman lives on selling manufactured or supplied goods. It ts
their ethical obligation to supply right goods and services
3. At present, people are falling sick of complex and severe diseases
from eating contaminated foods. It has a dire impact. Only, business
ethics can save us from this dire situation.

4. Medicine contamination causes death in many cases. The ethical
mentality Of the manufacturer of medicine can save from this
devastating Consequence,

2025
2025

Ethics in Business and Social Responsibilities 143

5, Business is a social institution. It is responsible to look after the good —
bad, welfare of the society,

6, Though, generation of profit is the main objective of business, it has
some social responsibility as well. To avoid the social responsibility is
not good for the business.

7. Te carry out social responsibility is obligatory for the development of business

8. The role of ethics is immense to maintain and operate the business
with sound and proper way. The decision of the business are correct
if the general rule for ethics are followed,

5, Though, temporary financial gain is possible from unethical activities of
the business its result is never good. There are many busimesses that have
gone astray by getting involved in unethical works though they made a
good stant.

10, Everybody hates the businessman involved in unethical activities. There

is no alternative of respect and honor for the businessman other than
availing ethics and right path-ways of business.

Concept of Social Responsibility and Its Importance

The social responsibility of business means to contribute to the well being and
welfare activities of the society along with earning profit. From ancient times,
the objective of the business has concentrated on profit only. But, the concept
has been changed now. Business is a social organization. Ils activities also
revolve around the society. To estimate the demand for goods and services and
manufacture and supply them accordingly to meet up the demand are the main
activities of business. To live a sound life there are some more demands such as
education, health service, entertainment etc. It is the duty of the government to
atrange to supply the expensive necessities for the people, since individual can
not arrange to supply them because of the incapacity. Recently, some business
organization are coming forward to perform various public welfare task like
establishing schools, college, hospital, providing scholarships to the meritorious
poor pupils, etc. Since business is a social institution, its existence and
profitability largely depends upon the support of the mass. Carrying out social
responsibility is the ethical responsibility of every business.

In real sense, a business person is a creative and well aware member of the
society. He is creative, mindful and effective. He has the right to receive
something form the society and similarly he has some responsibility to give
something back to the society. If he spends a part of his earned profit lor society
it will increase his honor and status in the society.
144 Business Entrepreneurship

Activity-I1 (group work): what are the reasons for businessmen to carry
out social responsibilities?

ssl esa (Piel (ead (oak

Case Study

Abul Kashem is an intelligent, brave, trustworthy and honest young man. He
plays arole to organize every program in his society. He used to visit a pharmacy
on his way to school while studying. Sometimes, he used to help the owner of
the pharmacy in various tasks. In this way, he acquired some knowledge on
pharmacy business. He failed to contiue his studies after SSC. So he sold some
ornaments of his mother and started a pharmacy with a small amount of capital.
He remembered some advises from his father such as 'Never deceive a person,
‘Give honest advice, if sought by anyone’ ‘Never tell lies’ ‘Respect your elders’
"Help the destitute’. Abul Kashem always followed ethics in operating his
business. He always gave good advice to patients about good doctors. Many
patients with complex diseases have been benefitted from his advice. Besides,
he used to sell genuine medicine. He never tried to make more profit by taking
higher price or selling duplicate medicine. For all these reasons. his profit grew
rapidly and he became reputed as an honest business person. Besides, his
business also prospered.

After a period of time, his son, Abdur Rahman took responsibility of the
pharmacy. But, out of his greed, he started to sell duplicate medicine. Many
people suffered from buying medicine from his shop. He gained disreputation
within short span of time as a dishonest businessman. Gradually, the business
lost its fame and had to be shut down.

Activity -2 (Team work) : Try to differentiate between Mr. Abul Kashem
& Abdur Rahman on the basis of their business activities

2025
Ethics in Business and Social Responsibilities 145

Social Responsibility of Business to Various Stakeholders

In this competilive business world, the business person has to carry out
responsibility to various stakeholders along with maintaining sustenance as per
profit growth. The stakeholders of business are state, society, buyer, worker etc.
These parties are involved with the business by some means.

Responsibility to State

The objective of the state is to ensure that business is done protecting the interest
of the people. Government is happy if demand for goods and services of mass is
met through establishing business and developing employment as well as
providing tax regularly. The following responsibilities are to be carried by the
business to the state:
a) To pay Tax to the government regularly
b) To follow the rules and regulations properly
c) To contribute for employment generation and economic development
Responsibility to the Society
The business is developed from enjoying various facilities from the society. So,
business has to carry out the following responsibilities favoring the society.
a) Producing quality products and supply them as per demand of the
society.
b) Creating opportunity for employment generation
c) Assisting in various public welfare works
d) Stand by the people at natural calamities
e) Safeguard the environment from pollution
f) Nol creating artificial storage of goods for making artificial scarcity
to make extra profit.

Responsibility to Customer and Consumer

The success of business depends upon the trust and cooperation of buyer
and consumer, So, the businessman has to carry out the following responsibilities:

a) To keep product market stabilized
b) To Supply quality products
¢) To make products easily available

d} To provide various information on products and market

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10. Formaa-19
146 Business Entrepreneurship

Responsibility to Employees

The profit of the business is earned through the untiring effort of employees and
staffs. Thus, business can not be operated ignoring their interest. With the
progress of business their salaries and wages should be increased, bonus and
inerement to be awarded and as a whole their condition should be improved. A
business person has to perform the following responsibilities towards the

employees: 4) To provide proper wages and financial benefit.
b) To provide job security
ce) To ensure suitable working environment
d) To arrange training and promotion
e) To arrange for residence and treatment

Social Activities by Different Business Organization

Though for many decades, the social responsibility of business has been disre-
garded, now a days, many organization of home and abroad are coming forward
for social activities. Various banks and Mobile operators are stepping forward to
carry out social responsibilities. Dutch-Bangla Bank. Prime Bank, Islami Bank.
Teletalk, Grameen Phone, Robi, Banglalink, Citycell, Airtel; such organizations
are contributing for the social development through working on poverty allevia-
tion, providing educational expenses for poor meritorious students, awarding
scholarships and providing financial assistance for the development of games
and sports. Some organizations are coming ahead to explore the genius among
the youth. In Bangladesh, the tendency of corporate social responsibility has
started recently. Bangladesh is hopeful that the profit oriented entrepreneurs of
our country will come forward to carry out the social responsibility more and
more in the future along with operating business,

Environment Pollution and Business

te

River Pollution from the industrial wastage

20235
2025

Ethies in Business and Social Responsibilities 147

The main disadvantage of business especially of industry is environmental
pollution. Industrial wastage and liquids are polluting the river and canal water.
Because of contamination, water becomes toxic for the things living under water
including fish. On the other hand, throwing wastage here and there, and fumes
from the vehicles pollute air. Factory machine and generator with their awful
noise cause serious sound pollution. Besides. in the name of industrialization
trees are cul down and hills are planed without any limits and environments are
polluted. In the name of land development for residence, filling up the canals
and water reservolr for residential purpose, river erosion, operating the ineligible
vehicles in the roads and extensive use of air conditioning machineries are
responsible for environmental pollution. For this reason health hazard is
increasing and on the other hand living creatures are being seriously
endangered.

Government has introduced new law to reduce pollution. But, lack of proper
implementation of the law the level of pollution is increasing day by day. Lack
of awareness about the effects of pollution, disposing wastage here and there and
flawed sewerage system are also responsible for environmental pollution.

Besides these it is necessary to Increase awareness through mass media, proper
application of law, developing wastage management and melusion of course on
environmental pollution in the curriculum, if we want to make us safe from the
environmental pollution.

Responsibilities of business Organizations in preventing environment
polution:

Wastages are being emitted from every industry. For example, lather mdustry,
and dying industry use chemicals which are harmful for environment, These
harmful wastages should not be thrown in flowing water of the rivers. canals and
ditches. In this case the owners and the businessmen should ensure about
wastage management while operating and during the time of establishment of
industries. For this, establishing waste treatment plant should be ensured for
every industry.

Activity-3 (Group based) : Find out the reasons for Air Pollution,
Water Pollution, Sound Pollution and Land Pollution by business and
its impact on environment.

Reasons for Air Pollution Impact on the environment

148

Business Entrepreneurship

Reasons for Water Pollution
*
Lt]

Impact on the environment
*
*

Reasons for Sound Pollution
Ld]
LJ

Impact on the environment
.
-

Reasons for Land Pollution
*

Impact on the environment
*
*

EXERCISE

Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)

|. What kind of organization the business is?

b. Social

c. Political d. Family
2. To sustain in the business in the long run, the businessman needs -

i. To earn extra profit

ii. Pricing the products perfectly

iil. Supply quality products.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. i & ii b. i & iii

c. ti & ill d. i, i & tii
After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3 & 4:
Mr. Fahim set up a leather based industry name "Tasnim Hide & Skin” in the
populous area at Agorpur in Kishoregonj. Since, the factory did not have
appropriate wastage disposing system, all ran towards the water reservoir. But,
he arranged residential facility for the workers nearby the factory and pays
government tax regularly.

a. Economical

£023
2025

Ethics in Business and Social Responsibilities 149

3. By paying taxes regularly, Mr. Fahim is carrying out responsibility to
which party?
a, Society b. State
c. Buyer d. Worker
4. The result of establishing the factory “Tasnim Hide & Skin’-
i. The standard of living of the people will increase
ii, There will be an adverse impact on the agricultural land of locality
iii. The living creatures in the water shall extinct
Which one of the following is correct?
ali & il b.1 & iii
c. li & ili d. i, it & iit
Creative Question

|. Shahid earns limited profit from his business doing with transparency. On the

other hand, his friend Nadim earns huge profit by selling contaminated and
low quality products to the customer. The buyers always gather in front of
Nadims shop because of his glittering products. Though, Sahid earns less than
Nadim; he is mentally very happy.

a. What is the meaning of ‘ethos’?

b. ‘Not to storing of products’ what kind of responsibility it is? Explain

c. Explain the reason for Sahid’s self satisfaction.

d. Is it possible for Nadim to sustain in the long run though he is earning
huge profit at present? Give your opinion in this regards.

2. Mr. Ali decided to set up a pharmaceutical company named "Nayeem
Pharma" in the forest area of Gazipur by cutting the trees on 500 acres of land.
Later, with the advice of an environmentalist friend, he established the factory
on a nearby vacant place. Medicines produced in his factory are exported
abroad after meeting the demand of our country. Around 2000 people are
working in is factory.

a. Black smoke exposed from mills and factories pollutes what elements

of the environment?

b. What do you understand by ethics in business?- explain,

c. How “Nayeem Phrma” is helping to develop the standard of living?
Explain.

d. Evaluate the first decision of Mr. Ali for setting up the factory.
