2025

Chapter Eight
Excretory System

Tj

A Baneladeshi scientist named Dr. Shuvo Roy invented

which is compatible for replacement in human body,

A good number of chemical reactions take place inside the cells of an organism.
So, all the physiological phenomena are performed neatly. Organisms remain
alive. Some products produced by chemical reactions are essential for the body.
But some are poisonous, and these must be removed from the body. For
example, the breakdown of glucose during respiration produces carbon dioxide.
This is carried away by the blood to the lung and is removed from Jungs to the
outside of the body, Kidney eliminates nitrogenous waste product and excessive
acid from the body by same way. Elimination of nitrogenous waste products and
various diseases in the kidney are discussed in this chapter.
©} site ont of this chapter, we will be able to-

e explain excretion in the human body;

e describe the production of excretory products in the human body;

e describe the structure and functions of the kidneys;

e describe the structure and functions of nephrons;

® explain the role of the kidneys in osmoregulation;

e describe the formation of kidney stones, remedies and prevention;

e describe the symptoms of kidney failure and what measures are to be taken in
these respects;

e explain the role of dialysis to maintain the normal functions of the kidneys;

® explain the concept of kidney transplantation and posthumous kidney donation;

e describe the diseases of the urinary tract and measures taken to keep it free
from diseases;

® investigate public opinion about posthumous kidney donation;

e draw a labeled diagram of human kidneys and nephrons;

® draw a poster to create social awareness about posthumous kidney donation;

e draw a leaflet to create awareness to keep kidney and urinary tract (ureter)
free from diseases;

® create awareness about to keep kidney and urinary tract healthy;

® create social awareness about posthumous kidney donation.

f025
8.1 Excretory

Excretion is the biological process through
which harmful nitrogenous waste products
produced by metabolic activity are removed
from the body. These substances are of no
use for the body, but may cause
various diseases if they remain imside the
body for long. It can ever cause death. The
system through which nitrogenous waste
products are excreted from the body is called
the excretory system. Excessive water, salt,
and organic substances are excreted or
expelled from the body to maintain
physiological balance. The kidney is an i
excretory organ, The basic unit of the Figure: 8.01 Exeretory system
lodney is the nephron.

Excretory products: Excretory products are mostly nitrogenous waste. Human

excretory products are expelled from the body as urine. As normal urine mass is
almost 95% of water. Other components are urea, uric acid, creatanine and different
kinds of salts. The colour of the urine is light yellow due to the presence of a
pigment called urochrome. Excessive intake of proteins increases the acidity
of urine. On the other hand fruits and vegetables generally make urine alkaline.

8.2 Kidney

The excretory organ of the human body is the kidney. Two kidneys lie at the
back of the abdominal cavity, on either side of the vertebral column and the
lower part of the ribcage, attached to the back wall. They are red brown in colour
and bean shaped. The outer side of the kidney is convex, and the inner side is
concave, with an indentation called the hilus or hilum, The ureter and renal vein
comes out from the hilum and the renal artery enters the kidney. Two ureters
arise from two lddney, proceeding downwards to open into the urinary bladder,
The funnel shaped extended part (space) of the ureter is called the renal pelvis.
Forma-23, Biology Class-9-10
Nephron
% _ Collecting tubule

Cortex

Renal artery

Renal
ven

Figure: $.02 L.S of Kidney
Kidneys are enclosed with a special fibrous membrane, called the renal capsule.
Adjacent to the renal capsule is the cortex, and the inner side (part) is the
medulla. Both of these regions are composed of connective tissues and blood
vessels. Generally, there are 8-12 renal pyramids in the medulla. The expanded apex
of each pyramid is called renal papilla. These papilla project directly into the ureter.
Each kidney contains a particular type of tubules called wriniferus tubules. Each
uriniferous tubule has two parts, the nephron and the collecting tubule. Urine is
produced in the nephron and the collecting tubules carry urine to the pelvis.
Nephron : The functional unit and the secretory part of uriniferons tubule of the
kidney is the nephron. Each human kidney contains about Imillion to 1.2 million
nephrons. Each nephron is composed of a renal corpuscle, or malphigian body, and
renal tubule.
Each renal corpuscle is divided into two parts, the glomerulus and the Bowman's
capsule. The Bowman's capsule encloses the glomerulus. Each Bowman's
capsule is a cup- shaped expanded organ, composed of two epithelial layers.
Inside the Bowman's capsule is a small cluster of blood vessels called the
glomerulus. Afferent arterials from the renal artery enters the capsule, and
breaks into about 50 capillaries. These capillaries divide again and form a mass
of fine capillaries. These capillaries unite together and form efferent arterials to
leave the Bowman's capsule.

2025
£23

Bfferent

Distal convoluted arteriale

ihe Glomerulus

Afferent
_—“arteriole

Bowman's Capsule

Proximal convoluted
tubule

Loop of Henle

Figure : 8.03 A nephron

The glomerulus acts as a filter and produces filtrate from blood, The liquid
filtrate is called ultrafiltrate. This ultra-filtrate, when passing through the
tubules, repeatedly goes through absorption and excretion. Finally the liquid
filtrate that remains is utine, which passes to the ureter through the collecting
tubules and finally deposits to the urinary bladder, which spreads up to the
tubules called renal tubules. These convoluted tubules are behind the Bowman's
capsule. Each renal tubules is divided into three regions: the proximal
convoluted tubules, Henley’s loop and the Distal convoluted tubule.

Activity: Draw a labelled diagram of kidney and a nephron.

Function of Kidney: A normal adult man expels almost 1500 milliliter urine
daily. Urine contains nitrogenous waste products, such as, urea, uric acid,
ammonia, creatinme etc. These are harmful to health. The kidneys play an
important role in eliminating these unwanted and harmful waste products. Each
nephron of the kidney is continuously producing urine through a complex
process. This urine reaches the pelvis of the kidney through collecting tubules
and proceeds through the fimnel- like extended part of the pelvis and enters the
ureter. The ureter carries urine to the urinary bladder, where il is stored
temporarily. When the urinary bladder fills with urine, a sensation to urinate is
created and allows urine to pass out of the body through the urethra. In this way,
kidneys help expel nitrogenous waste product from the body. The kidneys
maintain the balance of mineral salts e.g. sodium chloride, potassium chloride

etc. It also controls blood pressure and maintains the balance of water, acid and

base of blood.
Glomerulas enclosses
by Bowman's Capsule Returning of urea-tree
purified blood mito vein.
Ultra filtrate

Entrance of blood inte artery
with urea and other waste material

: The final absorption and
Pentization of urea, waler,

; secretion of essential
glucose and raineral salts material into blood from
into renal tubule from blood. renal tubule.

Return of glucose

and mineral sales ‘
pen Entrance of blood from
essential inta blood. collective tubule of renal
Return of water in required tubule into main tobule.
quantity into capillary tubule
(blood) from ureter.
Figure : 8.04 Fonction of Nephron
Activity: Write down how and which organ participate in waste product
elimination mentioned in the lower table.
a ——— = —— ————= =
" : Bs hee eae Fi
Carbon dioxide
Nitrogenous waste products
Urea, Uric acid
Excessive water

Role of the Kidneys in Osmoregulation

For all physiological processes, an adequate amount of water is necessary. Most
of the water is removed from the body as urine. The main function of the kidney
is to keep the balance of water. The nephrons of the kidney maintain water
equilibrium through reabsorption. Excretory fluids, water and other substances
are filtered in the glomerulus. In case of failure of the kidneys, water
accumulates in the body. The whole body, including eyes and face, may swell

2025
2025

up, and it can create high blood pressure. These are symptoms of errors in
osmoregulation. In chapter six regarding osmosis has been discussed. If a

solution is placed on one side of the selectively permeable membrane and on the
other side solvent of that solution is placed (in this case water), then the osmosis
will occur in the solution from the side of the pure solvent. It is possible to stop
osmosis by applying pressure from the side of the solution. For that the
minimum pressure that has to apply is called osmotic pressure of that solution.
The amount and concentration of water and salt in the organism is controlled in
such a way that the overall osmotic pressure remains almost unchange. This
process is called osmoregulation or water equillibrium.

Kidney stone: Normal activities of the kidneys can be hampered due to some
diseases (illness). Burning sensation of lidney, problems in urination and kidney
stone may occur. The symptoms of kidney diseases are: the whole body may
swell up (waterlogged), loss of albumin during urination, urine with patches of
blood, burning sensation during urination, urinating offen, or in some cases
urination reduced or stopped. Small stone like substances produced by the kidney
is known as the kidney stone. Any one can be attacked by these diseases. But
males have the higher possibility of stone formation than females. Excessive
body weight (obesity), infection in the kidneys, and intake of insufficient water
are the causes of kidney stones.

Initially the formation of kidney stones causes no remarkable problem.
Problems occur when the stone goes downward nto the ureter and obstructs
urination, A very dull and steady pain in the lower back is the symptom of ihis
disease. Blood passes into the urine. Fever starts with shaking. Treatment
depends upon the size and location of the stones. Stones can be removed by
taking sufficient water and treatment. Stones can be removed by modern
methods such as uteroscopic, ultrasonic lithtripsi or surgical operation.

8.3: Kidney failure, Dialysis and kidney transplant

Kidney failure occurs gradually from diseases such as nephrities, diabates,
hypertension (high blood pressure), stones etc. Side effects of some medicine,
severe diarrhoea, excessive blood loss etc. are also causes of sudden failure of
the kidneys. Symptoms of kidney failure are, difficulty in urination and
increased level of creatinine in blood. A kidney machine (dialysis machine) can
be used te remove the harmful waste products from a patient's blood. The patient
has to periodically use the kidney machine to purify the bleod.
Dialysis: When the kidneys are badly damaged or inactive, then the blood can be
filtered (purified) by a scientific method called dialysis. Generally dialysis is
done by a dialysis machine. One end of the dialysis tube of the dialysis machine
is led to the artery of patient’s wrist and another end is led to the vein of the same
wrist, Blood from the artery passes into the dialysis tube. The wall of the
dialysis tube is partially semipermeable, so urea, uric acid, other harmful
substances, are removed (as filtrate). The purified blood enters into the patient's
body through the vein. The dialysis tube is submerged im a liquid similar to that
of blood plasma, In this way, harmful nitrogenous waste is excreted out through
dialysis machine. But this process is very expensive and time consuming.
Blood is flowing from

artery by pumping through
dialysis machine
¥

Dialysis tube made of selectively
permeable membrane

Entry of blood from
dialysis machine lo vein

Urea and other waste

Dialysis fluid & material enriched fuid

Figure: 8.05 Dialysis machine

Transplantation: When the kidneys become damaged or inactive, they can be
replaced by a healthy kidney of a healthy person. This is called transplantation.
Kidney replacement can be done in two ways: a kidney taken from close relative
or from a dead person (posthumous), Close relatives mean the patient's father,
mother, siblings, uncle, aunt. A dead person would be a person who is brain dead
but the organs are kept alive artificially. Like posthumous eye donation
posthumous kidney donation also can help a kidney failure patient for survival.
Donation of posthumous kidney is a good service to mankind.

Millions of kidney failure patients get a healthy life by transplanting kidneys. In
our country, kidney transplantation has been done very successfully. Due to

2023
2025

"Bxeretory System 183

legal complications in our country. persons other than close relatives cannot
donate kidneys and due to this, patients are deprived from getting a healthy
kidney. Only one kidney is enough for a person for his /her survival, so kidney
failure could be treated by transplanting one kidney. Before transplantation,
matching of tissue is necessary. The probability of matching of kidney tissue is
higher with patient’s father, mother, siblings and close relatives.
Leading an unhealthy life and drinking insufficient water may cause urinary
tract or ureter disease. An Infection in the ureter causes burning sensations along
with other symptoms. With proper treatment most patient recover completely.
Previously it was though that everyone should drink eight glasses of water daily.
Modern research has shown that intake of water varies with sex, nature of job,
types of physical illness and weather. Excessive water should not be drunk
unless necessary. Water should be taken only to fulfil thirst.

Precaution: Many of us drink saline while sweating in hot weather, even if
we are not suffering from diarrhoea or vomiting. We drink saline if we are
tired or even without any reason. This is not right, especially in case of
elderly people. It can bring danger to their health. Even in case of suffering
from diarrhoea and vomiting, people should be treated with the prescribed
amount of saline as suggested by a doctor. In case of simple tiredness or
sweating, it is enough to drink some water mixed with lemon juice and a
pinch of salt. Sugar can be added for non-diabetic patients.

@) Individual Activity

Activity: Draw a poster regarding posthumous lidney donation and place it

in the classroom.
Measure to keep the urinary tract healthy: Everybody should be careful
about tonsillitis and scabies of children because it might be the reason of kidney
disease. High blood pressure and diabetes should be kept under control.
Immediate treatment for diarrhoea, blood loss, avoiding smoking and pain
relieving medicine, drinking adequate amount of water, lead a healthy life.

Individual Activity

Activity: Make a leaflet in a group regarding how to keep the kidneys and
the urinary tract healthy.
8 Biology
(?)Exercise

1, What is dialysis?

2. What is the malpigian organ?

3. What is the pelvis?

4, What is meant by excretory products?
5. What is meant by kidney stones?

1. Where is urea produced?

a) Kidney b) Liver

c) Body cell d) Renal artery
2. Decreases the possibility of forming kidney stones-

i) decreasing body weight

ii) drinking insufficient water

iii) intaking less amount of protein
Which one is correct?

aig&ii b)i& iii

¢) ii & iti d) i, ii & iti

Read the stem and answer questions 3 and 4.
Tanni does not follow the mles of drinking water and taking other foods.
Recently she excretes less urine and feels pain in her lower back.
3. Causes of producing less urine im the body of Tanni-

i) excessive sweating
il) taking less fruits ge
iii) taking salty food 3
Which one is correct?
a) i & ii bj & ii
c) i & ill di, i & i
4, The causes of this problem in the body of Tanni-
i) deposition of water in the body
ii) inflammation in urinary duct
iii) elimination of sugar with urine.
Which one is correct?
ai&ii b) ii & iii
c)i & iii d)i, ii & iti

a) What is the medulla?
b) What is meant by the glomerulus?
ec) Explain why Figure-A is compared with a filter?

d) If Figure-A is damaged or inactive, what measures will you take to prevent
damage to Figure A? Give your opinion.

Forma-24, Biology Class-9-10
Chapter Nine
Firmness and Locomotion

Humans move from one place to another in search of food, protection and
breeding in unfavourable condition. The process by which animals move from
one place to another by their own effort is called locomotion, The system, which
gives the structure, definite shape and protection of different organs from outer
injury and helps in locomotion, is called the skeletal system.

In this chapter we will learn about the structure of the skeletal system, its
function, and ways of protection.

2025
describe the human skeleton;

explain the role of the skeleton in firmness and locomotion:
explain the function of different kinds of bone and bone joints;
explain the function of muscles;

explain the fumetions of tendons and ligaments;

describe the causes, symptoms and remedy of osteoporosis;
describe the causes, symploms and remedy of arthritis;
investigate the reasons of osteoporosis and arthritis;

draw and label different parts of the skeleton;

make other conscious about the soundness of bones.

£23
9.1 Introduction of human skeleton

For the construction of a house at first a structural framework is essential. The
skeleton is the framework of our body. The human skeleton is composed of a
combination of 206 long, small, flat, unequal bones. It gives the delinite shape
to the body and protects the internal organs like heart, lungs, stomach, intestine,
brain ete. The number of bones in a child skeleton is more than the adult,
Without a strong bony structure a fixed shape is not possible. All bones and
associated parts together constitute the skeleton,

PL —

Uing

Humerus. = =

|

ULE
vitTs

val colurnn

Figure: 9.01 Human skeleton

Bones and bone joints both are the parts of a skeleton, Bone joints are connected
together with the various parts of the skeleton and assists in movement. Bones
remain attached with voluntary muscles that help the movement of different
organs. The skeletal system is composed of bones, cartilages. ligaments,
tendons, bone joints and muscles.

2025
2025

Huraan skeleton is divided into two parts:

(1) Exoskeleton and (2) Endoskeleton,

(1) Exoskeleton : The parts of the skeleton that exist outside the body e.g. nail,
hair etc.

(2) Endoskeleton : The part of the skeleton which can not be seen from outside
is called endoskeleton. Actually skeleton means the endoskeleton inside our
body. The endoskeleton is mainly composed of cartilages and bones.

9.1.1 Role of skeleton in firmness and locomotion

The skeleton has the following functions :

(a) Structure and firmness of the body- The skeleton forms the hard structure
of the body and gives a definite shape to the body. It joins lower organs with
upper organs.

(b) Protection and weight carrying- The skull protects the bram, the spinal cord
within the vertebral column or backbone, and the lungs and heart within the
thorax. Muscles are attached to the skeleton and skeletal muscles are involved
in carrying the weight of the body.

(c) Movement and Locomotion- Hands, legs, shoulders and the pectoral girdle
and pelvic or hip girdle help in movement. The muscular system has an
important role in this act. Due to the attachment of muscles with the bones, we
can move the bones and our bodies move.

(d) Production of red blood cells- Bone marrow produces red blood cells.

(e) Storage of mineral salts- Bones store mineral salts (calcium, potassium,
phosphorus ete), This is why the bones remain hard and strong.

9.1.2 Bone, Cartilage and Joint

Bone: The bone is a modified form of connective tissue. It is the strongest tissue
of the body. The matrix of the bone (or intercellular substance of the bone) is
composed of organic compounds. Bone cells are scattered within the matrix. The
older bones decay and new bones develop simultaneously. Different kinds of
bone diseases occur if the balanee (decay and development) is disturbed. In later
age, bone decay is relatively higher than bone formation. Bones are mainly
composed of different compounds of phosphorus, sodium, potassium and calcium. Tt
contains approximately 40-50%. Living bone cells contain 40% organic and 60%
inorganic substances. To develop bone cells, vitamin-D and calcium enriched
foods are needed. Due to the deficiency of these substances, normal growth of
bones is resisted. The Sunlight hits the cholesterol of the skin and brings some
changes which in turn brings some gradual changes in the liver and kidney and
thus, through this continuous process, vilamin-D is synthesized. So it is
necessary lo come in contact with adequate sunlight. There is a possibility of
suffering from deficiency of vilamin-D for those who always stay al home and
wear Clothes thal covers the whole body.

Cartilage: Cartilage is not hard just like bone. These are relatively soft and
elastic or flexible. It 1s a different form of connective tissue. These cells are
found solitary or in pairs and are densely scattered out within the matrix. From
the cartilaginous tissue a kind of hard semi transparent organic substance ts
secreted. This is called chondrin. Matrix is composed of chondrin. It is ight blue
in colour. In living cartilaginous cells the protoplasm is transparent, with a round
nucleus and cavity is noticed within the chondrin, These are called capsules or
lacunae. Chondrocytes and chondroblasts are inside it. All cartilage is enclosed
by a layer of fibrons connective tissues that is called the perichondrium. This
layer is glazing white in colour. So, cartilage looks white, bluish and glazy
shining. There are various types of cartilage within the body, e.g. the cartilage in
the pinna. Cartilages is found in different joints, or on the articulating surface of
some of the bones.

| Activity: Find out the differences between bone and cartilage.

Bone joint or articulation: The joints between two or more bones are called
bone joints. In every joint. bones are joined firmly together by flexible elastic
tissues called ligaments. So, the bones can not be dislocated easily. The joint
helps in the movement of limbs. All the joints of our body are not of the same
type. Some are fixed, e.g. intervertebral joint. Some are freely moveable e.g.
joints of hands and legs.

Synovial joint: When two ends of two bones touch, it makes a joint to form a
synovial bone joint. When more than two bones make a joint, it is called complex
synovial joint. S
The parts of synovial joints are: bone ends covered with cartilage, and 3
2025

synovial fluids and a cover or
capsule which is a tough fibrous
tissue or ligament that firmly holds
the joint. The synovial fluid and the

Penostewm

: ip ae a er Bi ——Strongbone 2
cartilage of the joint reduces friction ene. J rise meri @
so that less energy is consumed for pal g

* — Synovial cavity

movement of joint.

Bone joints are of different types.

(a) Fixed joint- The bones are
joined firmly, so it is immoveable.
Example- joint of the cranium,

(b) Slightly movable joint- These joints are joined with one another and has a
small sliding surface. So, we can bend the body. For example-joint of
backbone.

(c) Freely movable joint- These joints can be moved easily. For example- hingle

joint, synovial bone joint and socket joint is only freely movable ball.

Figure: 9.02 Synovial joint

Ball & Socket joint

=
f

Inge joint
Figure: 9.3 Ball and socket and hinge joint

(i) Ball and socket joint : Joints where the round one head of the bone fits into a

cup shaped socket or cavity of another bone in such a way that it allows the bone's

movement in all planes. This is also a type of synovial joints.

For example: Shoulder joint, ball and socket joint of thigh bone.

(ii) Hinge joint: The elbows, knees, joints of the finger are the examples of hinge

joints. It moves like a hinge of a door. It can be moved in one plane only. These

are also examples of synovial joints.
Activity: Draw the different parts of the human skeleton and label them.

9.2 Muscles

You have learned earlier about muscles in class seven. The muscular system

consists of involuntary muscles of the internal organs, the wall of the blood

vessels, the cardiac muscles of the heart, and the voluntary muscles that are
attached to the bones. The muscular system performs various important
functions, such as:

* Movement of organs, help in movement, placing the organs im orderly manner
and balancing.

* The muscular system along with the skeletal system gives a definite structure
of the body. Muscles store glycogen for the uses of the source of power for
emergency need in future.

* The cardiac muscles are of special type, it maintains heart beat and blood
circulation.

* Muscles keep active role in the expulsion of stool from the body and in the
movement of food particle inside the alimentary canal.

9.2.1 Role of bones and muscles in human locomotion

The muscles and bones perform an important role in locomotion. The bone

constitutes the structure of the body (ie. skeleton) and muscular system makes

the covering of this structure, Voluntary muscles are attached to the bones by a

strong elastic part named a tendon. Muscle contraction is the result of nerve

impulses. With the withdrawal of impulses the muscle again extends or relaxes.

This contraction and relaxation of muscles, attached with the bones, helps in

movement, In this way muscles help in stretching or extension of limbs.

Contraction of the muscle draws a bone or limb away from the body or towards

the body, helps in lowering a part, lifting a part or rotating a part etc. The role of

muscles in the movement of bones is described with an example: observe how
muscles work to bend or extend the elbow. The arm can bend at the elbow. The
biceps muscle is attached to the scapula at the top and the radius at the bottom.

By the stimulation of voluntary nerves when it contracts, the biceps pull the

f025
radius and ulna towards the body, so the arm bends. At that time the triceps
muscle relaxes and also expands. To push the arm back down again, an
opposite phenomenon occurs. That means by stimulation of voluntary nerves,
the triceps muscle contracts and straightens or extends the radius and ulna. At
the same time, the biceps relaxes and also expands. In this way we can bend and
extend our arm by the simultaneous contraction of the biceps and triceps
muscles, In this way various muscles help in the movement of different organs.

Biceps. muscle

Triceps musele

Triceps muscles

Figure: 9.04 shows opposite action of biceps and triceps muscle
in movement of forearm.
9.2.2 Tendon and ligament

When we say that tnuscles are attached to the bones or one bone is attached to
another bone with the help of a band then a question may arise. how and why
this happens. The terminal portion of muscles form a rope like strong structure
which is attached to the bones. This strong terminal portion of the muscle is
called a tendon. Tendons are composed of dense, white fibrous connective
tissues.

Unbranched white fibers are scattered in the matrix. These are composed of
parallel bundles. Numerous fibers form a bundle. These bundles together make
a bunch of bundles. The outer surface of these bundles is surrounded by areolar
tissue and make a big bunch. Blood vessels, lymphatic ducts and nerves enter

into the tendon through this areolar tissue. The elasticity of tendon is
comparatively very low.

The fibers of the tendon are attached with the sarcolema of the muscle fibers, At
the junction between muscles and tendons the areolar tissues that surround the
bunch of bundles of tendon forms a continuous connection with the muscle
bundles to build a strong connection, The tendon is strong and has less chance

Forma-25, Biology Class-9-10
of tearing or breaking than that of a muscle or bone, but if it does tear, there is no
chance of repair. The tendon is a rope like structure which is attached to the bone
and constitutes a structure of the body that renders firmness, helps in the
formation of ligament and makes a mechanical defence against tensile strength.
Bones are attached to each other by a thin, cloth-like, soft but strong, elastic
band like structure. These are ligaments. They are composed of a combination
of white and yellow fibers. The number of elastic yellow fibers is excessive. A
fine, branched network of elastic fibers is scattered in this kind of tissue. The
fibers stay separate instead of in bundles. Their elasticity is comparatively high
and are composed of elastic pretein. There are fibroblast cells in the fibers. Just
like a hinge altaches the door to its frame, in the same way tendons and
ligaments are firmly attached to the bones. So, the organ can bend, stretch and
move and the bones are not dislocated or separated.

Figure: 9.5 tendon and Ligament

Activity: Draw this table in your note book and fill it.

ere

Function

Elasticity

2025
£23

9,3 Diseases of Bones

(a) Osteoporosis : You have learned earlier that, calcium is an important
ingredient for the formation of bones and for their strength. Calcium and vitamin
enriched food is essential for the growth of bones. Osteoporesis 1s a calcium
deficiency disease.

Generally, elderly males and females suffer from this disease. There is a higher
chance of having this disease in males who are taking medicine with steroids and
the females after their menopause, Those, who lead lazy life, do less physical

labour have a higher chance of being attacked with this disease. Besides this,
there is a maximum possibility of osteoporosis in a person if he/she has suffered
from arthritis for a long time.

Causes: This disease develops due to the deficiency of mineral salts, particularly
of calcium. After reaching the menopause stage, the density and. thickness of
bones declines in females, and the bones become brittle.

Symptoms:

* bones become brittle, thickness decreases

* muscle strength reduces

* feel back pain

* pain in bones

Diagnosis : The disease can be diagnosed by examining the density of the bone
with the help of density measuring equipment. At the preliminary stage of the
disease, the symptoms are not noticed. Suddenly hip bones or any other bone
may fracture.

Remedies:

*« Man and woman who are above 50 should take 1200 milligram calcium or
amount according to the advice of doctor’s.

* Drink skimmed milk and other dairy products.

* Consume orange juice, green vegetables, soya product and calcium enriched
food.

Prevention:

¢ Come in contact with adequate sunlight.

* Taking vitamin- 'D' and caleium enriched food.

* Regular exercise (those who are already suffering from osteoporosis should
take doctor’s advice before starting exercise).

* Take balanced and cellulose-rich food.
(b) Rheumatoid Arthritis: Of the hundreds of type of arthritis, rheumatoids

arthritis is one of them, Generally elderly people suffer from this disease. A young

person's pain in the joints may be a symptom of rheumatic or any other disease

(to be seen in chapter-6). Treatment varies according to the nature of pain in

bone joints. Two persons may sulfer from two different joint pains but show the

same syrmptom. In this case both of them need different treatments. So treatment

should not be stopped without doctor's consultation, It may bring bad effects

instead of benefits.

Symptoms

* Inflammation and pain in bone joints.

* Stiff bone joints.

* Pain during articular movement.

* Joint swelling.

Remedies: The disease is not fully cured for elderly people. But the following

measures may relieve the disease to some extent.

* Avoid hard labour and heavy work.

* Apply luke warm heat in the affected joint.

* Do light exercise to keep the jomt moveable.

* According to the doctor's advice taking pain relieving medicine and proper
treatment can relieve of this disease.

Prevention:
* Regular exercise according to the doctor’s advice.
* Taking balanced and fibrous food.

| Activity: Collect information about life style, and consumption of food for
the women who are above 50. Find out the causes of osteoporosis, arthritis

| among them and write them down.

2025
2025

(?)Exercise

1. What is bone joint?

2, What are the five functions of skeleton?

3, What are the differences between tendon and ligament?
4. What are the characteristics of a synovial joint?

5. What are the differences between bone and cartilage.

1. Which one is a characteristic of bone?

a) Elastic b) Soft

c) Strong d) Fibrous
2. Tissues of tendons are —

i) white and glossy

ii) unbranched and waved

iii) fibrous and in cluster

Which one is correct?
ai&ii b) i & iil
o) it tii di eu

Observed the stem and answer the questions 3 and 4.
60 years old Rahima Begum can not work due to pain in her hand and foot.
The doctor has said, she is suffering from osteoporosis due lo calcium deficiency,
Which one is a symptom of this disease?
a) increase the density of bone
¢) feel pain in waist d) increasing muscle strength

b) bone becomes brittle

Which one is a preventive measure of this disease -
i) taking roughage based food

ii) to avoid lazy life

iii) taking less vitamin ‘TD* enriched food

which one is correct?

ai&i b) i é& iil
c)u & ii a) 1, vi ae in

Creative questions:

lL,

12 years old Binita is healthy and restless. She spends most of the day time

running and playing. One day while she was running she fell down and the ligaments

of her leg were injured.

a) What is bone?

b) What do you mean by arthritis?

c) Explain why the injured part of Binita’s body can be compared with a_ hinge.

d) What type of co-ordination is necessary to carry out the activities done by Binita?
Analyse it.

What is tendon?

What does it mean by osteoporosis?

Explain why the cell structure of 'X’ of the figure is different?

How does co-ordination between X and Y of the figure plays a role in the
movement of organisms? Analyse it,

2025
