2025

Chapter Five
Market

In economics, the concept of market is related to the demand, supply, and price
determination of goods, etc. Therefore, the concept of market is explained in
perspect of time limit, in terms of area, the nature of the goods and on the basis
of competition, There are different types of market in Bangladesh. Changes are
noticed in the thoughts and ideas of the buyers and sellers in the market because
of many basic characteristics.

After studying this chapter, we will be able to-

illustrate the concept of market;

describe the method of development of market;

explain the characteristics of a perfect competitive market;
compare monopoly market with monopolistic competitive market;
identify the types of the market systems of Bangladesh;

be inspired to know about the reasons of the change in the price of goods
and their influence and

draw the market type chart on the basis of competition.
68 Economics

5, Market

Subed Ali is a job holder. He went to New Market in the first week of the month
of May to buy the necessary goods for his household. Verifying the prices of
fish, vegetables, rice, dal, sugar, oil, salt. etc. he bought these. The traders sold
their goods to Subed Ali in exchange for money. Shraboni ordered a dress
online. She paid the price getting the dress in time, In the above mentioned
events, the connection between the buyer and the seller over the goods is called
market,

In economics, market does not stand for just a specific place for buying and
selling. Rather, market is a process. A process where goods and services are
bought and sold between the buyers and the sellers in different ways, e.g. buying
and selling online, buying and sellmg over the phone or fax. In these types of
market, many types of goods can be bought and sold, or some specialised goods
can be exchanged. For example, buying and selling cement over phone.

Markets can be different as per the types of the products, e.g. market for jute,
market for paddy, labour market, market for tea, gold market, share market, etc.
On the other hand, there are very short-term markets, short-term markets and
long-term markets, which are based on the duration of time.

The price of the goods is decided on through bargain between the buyer and the
seller. The buying and selling of the goods is dependent on this price. Once the
price is decided on the buyers and sellers buy and sell products and services. The
demand and supply forces decide on the price.

According to the French economist Kurnat, "The economists do not mean any
specific place for buying and selling goods by the world market. Rather they
mean the whole of a region, where through free communication between the
buyers and sellers, there grows the tendency for the price to become equivalent
easily and quickly."

Task: Find out the characteristics of market.

2023
2025

Market 69

5.1 Development and Types of Market

The basic matters that work for the concept of market are demand, supply, time
and price.

In the market system, at a specific time, by different mediums, through
bargaining the buyer and the seller fix the price of the goods or the service and
exchange them. In the perspective of this idea, in the course of time, due to
different situations, different types of market have been originated. And the
market system has developed.

Market expansion can be classified in 3 ways

L. Market on the basis of 2. Market on the basis of
time region
¥ ¥
* Very short time market * Locl market
* Short time market * National market
* Long time market * International market

3. Market on the basis of competition

|
[ |

| (Perfect Competitive Market) | | (Inperfect Competitive Market)
T

1. Monopoly Marker
2. Monopalistic Competitive Market
3. Oligopoly Market

Task: Prepare a chart of the market system on the basis of competition.

The originations of market have been different over the time.

1. Very Short-Term Market: Where the supply of the goods is stable at a
fixed time, the production can not be increased in that short period of time.
Even if the demand rises or falls, the supply of the goods cannot be changed.
The raw material market can be taken as an example. In this type of market,
70

oi

Economics

within the short time in the morning, even when the demand or the price of
the goods rises, the supply of the goods cannot be changed.

Short-Term Market: When there is a change in the demand, the supply
may be able to respond a little. In this market, the firm, remaining the same
size, can adjust the changeable factors and bring change to the supply to
some extent. On the other hand, if the demand of the goods falls, the firm
can still produce or if the demand in the market is even worse, the firm can
even stop producing for some time. Therefore, in the short-term market,
because of any change in the demand of the goods, supply can respond to an
extent.

Long-Term Market: With any change in the demand, any kind of change
is possible in the supply. In this case, any production institution can bring a
complete change in the size and factors of production. If the demand is
growing for a long time, the production organization tries to bring a balance
combining the demand and the supply by establishing new machinery and
changing the usage of other factors, ¢.¢. raw materials market, fish market,
jute, tea or rice market, mango market, labour market, finance market,
capital market, woven cloth market, fruit market, etc.

Market is divided into three kinds on the basis of the range of availability of goods,

Local Market: In the market of goods where the sellers and the buyers are
limited within a particular area is called Local Market, e.g. the market of
meat.

National Market: In the Market of goods where the sellers and the buyers
are within a country is called National Market, e.g. the market of coarse
rice.

International Market: In the market of goods where the sellers and the
buyers are expanded beyond the boundary of a country is called
International Market, e.g. readymade garments.

Classification of market on the basis of competition

We have been introduced to the types of the market in the earlier section with
respect to the time, place or size of the market. Now we will discuss the total

2025
2025

Market 71

market structure in the light of competition. Actually, this type of analysis is more
important for economics. The types of the market on the basis of competition are:
1. Perfectly Competitive Market 2. Imperfectly competitive market. Imperfectly
Competitive Market 1s mainly of 3 tipes: a. Monopoly Market, b. Oligopoly
Market, c. Monopolistic Competitive Market, ete. Very briefly some ideas about
a number of markets like these are given below.

1. Perfectly Competitive Market

Perfectly competitive market is a system of market where numerous buyers and
sellers buy and sell similar kind of products. No buyer or seller can change the
price of the good once if it is decided by the demand and supply in the market.
The demand of one buyer or the supply of one seller is an insignificant part of
the market. Therefore, one or a very few numbers of buyers or sellers cannot
influence the market of the similar types of goods. So, the buyer or seller has to
comply with the price that has been fixed in the perfectly competitive market.

Characteristics of Perfectly Competitive Market
Let us take a look at the characteristics of the perfectly competitive market.

1. Numerous buyers and sellers: There are numerous buyers and sellers of
goods in a perfectly competitive market.

2. The unit of the goods is similar: The goods considered in a perfectly
competitive market are similar or of the same quality. From the perspective
of size or quality, one unit cannot be differentiated from another. The units
of the goods which are the same according to their making and quality, but
still can be differentiated, are known as similar goods, e.g. rice, dal, etc.

3. The buyer and the seller are fully aware of the market: If the market
system 1s perfectly competitive, the buyer and the sellers, in that case are
fully aware of the qualities of the unit of the goods and the price.

4. The free entry and exit of the firms in the industry: In an industry under
the perfectly competitive market, a firm can enter freely in the long run, and
if necessary, can leave the industry. There is no impediment to that.
72 Economics

5. No external influence: There is no external or governmental influence on
the setting of production or price in the perfectly competitive market. To
sum up, government does not use any influence by taxation, giving
subsidies, rationing, etc.

6. Full mobility of factors: There is free movement of factors in the perfectly
competitive market. There is no obstacle in the movement of any of the
factors including the labour factor. Due to the dynamism of factors amongst
the industries, the price of the factors remains the same everywhere.

7. The producer takes the initiative to maximize the profit at a particular
price: The main objective of the perfectly competitive farm is to earn the
highest profit at the lowest cost. Although the farm tries to take the profit to
the highest at the given cost, in the long term, the industry earns the normal
profit. It has to be kept im mind that when the total cost and the total income
are the same, that is said to be the normal profit. Here it has calculated that
entrepreneur’s labour is included mn cost side and entrepreneur’s
honorarium is included in income side.

2. The Types of Imperfectly Competive Market
a. Monopoly Market

Mono means one and poly means seller. Therefore, the meaning of the word
‘monopoly’ is only one seller. The dictionary meaning of the word monopoly is
the sole right to produce and sell goods by a person, government or corporation.
Therefore, when a firm produces these goods and supplies them to the
innumerable customers, the firm is called a monopoly business, and the market
where that goods are bought and sold is called the monopoly market. The firm
that achieves the monopolistic right to sell goods controls the supply of the
goods in the market. Up to a fixed period of time, no other firm than this
particular one can produce those goods, so there is no difference between a firm
and an industry in the monopoly market. A completely monopolistic market
may be a bit difficult to find. But a number of examples can be given of the
almost monopoly market, for example, Bangladesh Oxygen and Arms and
Anmunition factory situated at Joydevpur, etc.

20125
Market 73

Characteristics of Monopoly Market

The following characteristics can be identified if the monopoly market is
analysed:

1.

The seller controls the production or supply: In a monopoly market,
there is only one producer or seller. Therefore, the seller is the one who
entirely controls the production and supply of the goods in the market.

There are no near-alternative goods: There are no near-aliernative
goods for the product produced and sold by the monopolistic farm. That
means, there is no similar or nearly similar goods for that product.

Try to earn the highest profit: If the monopoly business is run by a person
or private sector, the objective of the monopoly business is to earn the

highest profit.

The firm and the industry are the same for the monopoly business:
There is only one firm in monopoly market. Thereby, that firm is known as
the industry.

Singular controller of the price or supply: The monopoly firm singularly
supplies the production. Being the only producer, it can control the price or
ihe supply of the product very easily. but it can not control both price and
supply at the same time.

The entry of a new firm is prohibited: In the monopoly industry, there is
ho opportunity for any new firm to enter. When there is a possibility for a
new firm to enter, the monopoly firm increases the production and allows
the price to fall. Thereby, in fear of a probable loss, the new firm does not
enter. That is why in a monopoly market, no new firm can enter.

Task: Compare perfectly competitive market and monopoly market.

b. Monopolistic Competitive Market

In the monopolistic competitive market, a few characteristics of both the

perfectly competitive market and the monopoly market are observed. In a

monopoly market. the goods that the different farms produce may be similar but

Forma-10, Economics Class 9-10
74 Economics

not completely the same. That is, there are some differences among the products.
And in this difference of the goods, the features of the monopoly market are
prevalent. On the other hand, as there are numerous buyers and sellers, the
features of a perfectly competitive market are also observed. The market, which
is based on the combination of competition of almost similar but differentiable
products and monopoly products, is called the monopolisite competitive market
e.g. body soap made by different companies are almost the same, yet it is
possible to differentiate between them, e.g. the covers are different or the scents
are different. If the price of any of these soaps rises, the demand of soaps may
fall a little, but does not become zero. The fixed buyer of this soap always buys
this soap. If there is a change in the price of these goods, the buyer does not leave
to consume this goods or to use it.

Characteristics of Monopolistic Competitive Market

The major characteristics of the monopolistic competitive market are discussed
below:

1, Number of firms/sellers: In the monopolistic competition, one farm can
control a small portion of the total production of the market. So, it is not
possible for any firm to exert considerable influence upon the price of the
goods or the total production. Therefore, sometimes there exist unions or
firms that belong to a group.

2. Differentiation between the produced goods: Different products that
different firms produce in this type of market are to a large extent similar
yet differentiable from one another. The goods are different to some extent
regarding quality and some external factors. That is, the differentiation
between the products means that the goods produced by different firms are
not of the same kind, That is why the monopolistic competition starts off,

3. The free entry and exit of a firm in the industry: In the monopolistic
competition, there is no restriction for any firm to enter the industry or exit.
Usually, if any firm makes excessive profit over the short term, new firms
enter the industry in the long term. On the other hand, facing a loss, a firm

2023
2025

Market rie

can leave the industry in the long term. There is no internal or external
objection regarding that.

Advertisement and the cost of sale: Each of the firms publicizes its goods
more to enhance its sale. The cost of advertising and other related costs of
selling for these firms, therefore, increase. The firms compete with one
another by advertisements and the standards of qualities of the products.

The nature of demand: If a firm increases the price of its goods. many
consumers buy the alternative goods of other firms, but there are some
consumers who continue to buy the product of the first firm even if in a
smaller quantity. That means the demand for some goods does not fall to be
zero even when the firms increase the price of those goods. Some of the
buyers have special preferences for some firms, therefore, the shape of the
demand curves of each of the firms is not usually the same. The shape of the
demand curve mainly depends upon how much different the goods of the
firm are being considered from the goods of the other firms.

Maximization of profit: In a monopolistic competitive market, the
objective of each of the sellers is to maximize the amount of the profit to its
optimum limit.

Copying the goods: In the monopolistic competitive market, one seller
cannot copy the goods produced by another seller completely. Thereby.
each of the sellers or firms, like the monopoly firms, can control the supply
of their own goods and thus, by controlling the supply can also control the
prices of their goods.

Long term situation: The balance of the firm in the long term in the
monopolistic competitive market remains at the normal profit level like that
of the perfectly competitive market.

Task: Write down five characteristics of monopolistic competitive market.

C. Oligopoly Market
Oligopoly is such a market where several sellers and many buyers buy and sell
76 Economics

homogenous or almost homogenous goods. In this type of market, a seller takes
decision by observing other sellers’ strategy, e.g. Firm 'A' of telecommunication
sector, uses a filmstar in it's advertisement; Firm 'B' uses a popular player in it's
advertisement to attract the buyers.

Characteristics of Oligopoly Market

1. Number of seller: This type of market has a few sellers.

2. Nature of goods: The goods of this type of market are homogenous or
identical or almost homogenous of which a little can be differentiated.

3. Decision Making: By observing other competitive firms’ strategy, a firm in
this type of market makes decision in choosing the price of its goods and
amount of production.

4. Influence of Advertisement: In this market, firms resort to advertisements
to attract the buyers.

Task: Write down three characteristics of oligopoly market.

5.2 Market System of Bangladesh

The perfectly competitive market system, the monopoly market system and the
monopolistic competitive market system have been discussed in this chapter.
Because of the nature and environment of Bangladesh, different types of market
and modes of buying and selling can be observed for different kinds of goods.
The three types of market can be discussed as realistic examples.

1. Perfectly Competitive Market: There is no perfectly competitive market
for any goods in Bangladesh, but nearly perfectly competitive markets can
be found. The retail market of agricultural goods in Bangladesh is a good
example of this type of market, For example, in the primary market of rice
there are numerous buyers and sellers and no single producer can influence
the market of rice. Similarly, markets for other crops, fish, chicken, egg,
milk, etc. are also perfectly competitive or almost so. This market is also
seen In cases of some services too, e.g. rickshaw transportation.

2023
2025

Market 77

2. Monopoly market: Monopoly market of produced goods is not found in

Bangladesh. But in cases of imported products or services, this type of

market exists, e.g. the only importer of fuel oil is Bangladesh Petroleum
Corporation. This type of market is also prevailing in Dhaka city in the cases
of water, electricity and gas supply. For railway transportation, Bangladesh
Railway is the only institution.

Monopolistic competitive market: The market for different goods in
Bangladesh is monopolistic competitive, e.g. different food products,
cosmetics, etc. For some services also, this type of market can be found,
e.g. private hospitals and diagnostic centres.

‘Task: On the basis of place what kinds of market are the following products? Give

Namie of the goods Name of the region market

i,
j.

. Guavas, bananas, boroi aan biaduscutvestessnsnsuuccuae
Si@geemat? ae ea reer

soe me an os p

arguement.

and argument
Mangoes i ntttnartrtieeetsneenssan tenes
Jackfruits: dla
Vepetables sealant Ran TLR
Fish
Woven cloths ii aetttaateesueesisteessaeecneas
Tee cetnatettierersneensnne renin

Cow-milk class sh enw dase Bae
Meet aseetsseeteeuseensseeeeas

Exercise

Short Questions

ha we bo

What is meant by market?

Write down two characteristics of a perfect competitive market.
What are the three fundamental things in the market system?

How many types of market are there from the stand point of time and what are they?
How many types of market are there regarding region and what they are?
78 Econoniics

6. What are the characteristics of goods in a monopoly market?

7. Give an idea of firm and industry.

Descriptive Questions
1. Illustrate the classification of market from the perspective of time limit.

2, Give an idea of a perfectly competitive market and Inperfect competitive
market. Mention the 8 characteristics of perfectly competitive market.

3. Explain the characteristics of monopoly market.
4. Give an idea of monopolistic competitive market. Iiustrate its features.

Make a chart of the market structure based on the competitions mentioned in
your book. Give an introduction to the markel systems of different
products in Bangladesh.

Multiple-Choice Questions

1. ‘Buyers and sellers completely know the quality of goods and price’. In which
market can you find this characteristic?
a. Monopoly b. Perfectly competitive
c. Ohgopoly d. Monopolistic competitive

2. Buying and selling according to the law of price mean
i. through the bargain between buyer and seller.
ii. by themutual action and reaction of demand and supply,
iii. on the basis of a fixed price.
Which of the following is correct’
ao b.iand u

ec. land iti d. iand ii
Read the following passage and answer question numbers 3 and 4.

Bringing small fishes and chickens from roadside market, Mr. Siddique came
home at 8 A.M. Mrs. Siddique informed that there were no vegetables at home.
He said that vegetables would not be available at that tume.

3. From what type of market did Mr. Siddique buy fishes and chickens?
a. very short term b. long term

2025

c. very long term d. short term
2025

Market 79

4. The characteristic of this market is
i, artival of too many people for buying and selling goods.
ii. the quality and the shape of the sold goods are of the same type.
iii. the same person controls the supply of goods of the market.

Which of the following is correct?
a. landii b. 1 and it
c. dandin d. 1, G and in
Creative Questions

1. Kamal: Give me a Matador pen.

Shopper: Bhaia, this week the price of the Econo pen has gone down. Would you
like to have that?

Kamal: Why? Is Econo different in quality from matador?

Shopper: No, it's not like that, There are many companies in the market. All of
their pens are almost the same; They just look a little different.

Kamal: In that case, give me a Matador, please. | like it more.

a. What isa firm?

b. Explain the idea of short term market.

Which market does the product bought by Kamal belong to? Explain.

Analyse the relation between the perfectly competitive market and the
market of the goods bought by Kamal.

BA

2. Rimi uses bags of one particular brand. When she goes to the market to buy
a new bag. she finds the price much higher than earlier. When she wanted
to know the reason for this, the shopkeeper answered that the bags are
imported by only one company. They have got nothing to do if the company
raises the price. Since there is no other bag like this in the market, Rimi has
to buy the bag at a higher price.

What is a factor?
What is meant by product differentiation?

a

b.

ce. Which market are the goods that Rimi bought from? Explain.

d. What is the kind of the goods bought by Rimi in Bangladesh? Analyse.
