Chapter Six
National Income and Its Measurments

The economic situation of a country can be understood [rom the national income
of that country. That is. it is possible to assume whether the country is developed
or developing or underdeveloped. To know how much the national income of a
country is, national income has to be measured. In this chapter. the system and
technique of measuring the national income of Bangladesh will be discussed.

Other tax end dury
ae
Sales tax

32%

After studying this chapter, we will be able to-

illustrate the ideas of national income;

show the differences between the national income (NI) and the gtoss domestic
product (GDP);

compare the national income (ND) and the net national product (NNP);
illustrate the systems of measuring the national income;

classify the determinants of GDP in two groups, which are factors and technology ;
prepare a list of the factors outside GDP and

describe the system to measure the national income in Bangladesh.

2025
National Income and Its Measurement al

6.1 Concepts of National Income
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)

At a specific time, usually one year, the sum total of the market price of the
final goods and services produced within the geographical boundary of a
country is called the gross domestic product or GDP.

Let us assume that three goods are produced within Bangladesh in a year, e.g.
100 quintals of paddy, 1000 shirts, and 1000 pens. GDP=100 quintal of paddy x
the market price of paddy + 1000 shirts x market price of shirts + 1000 pens
x market price of the pens. Thus GDP of a country is calculated by summing the
result of the multiplication of the amount of all produced goods with their own
prices. If rice is produced as a final goods from paddy, then at the time of
calculation, we will have to estimate the production and the price of rice.

Gross National Income (GNI)

At a specific time, usually within one fiscal year, the sum total of the market
price of the total amount of the final goods and services produced by the citizens
ofa country is known as the gross national income or GNI. It is also called gross
national product (GNP).

The gross national income can be determined by adding the gross domestic
product and the net factor income. Net factor income means the subtraction
result of the income of the citizens of a country from foreign investments and
labour, and the income of the foreign citizens from their investment and labour in
the country being considered. If this amount is negative, the gross national
income will become less than the gross domestic income. Again, if it is positive,
the gross national income will become less than the gross domestic income. The
second one is true in the perspective of Bangladesh.

Net National Income (NNI)/Net National Production (NNP)

In an economy, at a specific time, if the Capital Consumption Allowance or CCA
or Depreciation is deducted from the monetary price of the final products and
services, what is left is known as the net national income (NNI) or net national
product (NNP). The capital consumption allowance means the cost of the
supervision for the wearing away or decays due to the use of the capital.
Forma-11, Economics Class 9-10
$2

Economics

Relationship between Gross Domestic Product and National Income

Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
+ Remittance from local products
- Income of the foreign factors engaged in domestic market
Gross National Income/Gross National Production
- Depreciation cost
Net National Income/Net National Product
- Indirect Tax
National Income (NI)

Task: 1 Give the full meaning of GNI, GDP and CCA?
Task: 2. What is CCA (Capital Consumption Allowance) really?

6.2 Measurments of Gross Domestic Product— Production, Income

and Expenditure Approach

The national income can be measured basically in three ways. They are— the
Production approach, the Income approach and the Expenditure approach.

1,

ae)

Production approach: The economy of a country is divided into some
important sectors. Adding the value of the final products and services
produced in these sectors in one year, the gross domestic product can be
calculated. The economy of Bangladesh can be divided into 15 sectors and
the value of the production is decided sector-wise. In the end, summing up the
value of production in these 15 sectors, the gross national product is
determined.

- Income approach: The National income in this system is the sum total of the

income received by the factors used in production. The basic factors used in
production aré—land. labour, capital and organisation. Their incomes are
respectively revenue, wage, interest and profit. Therefore, national income =
Sirevenue +} wage +} interest +} profit.

. Expenditure approach: In this system, the national income is the sum total

of all kinds of expenditure in a society at a specific time. The total

2023
2025

National Income and Its Measurement 83

expenditure in a society stands for the cost of consumption and investment of
the individual sector and the governmental expenditure and the net export.
Therefore, consumption + investment + governmental expenditure + net
export (= export - Import) = gross domestic product. So, gross domestic
product or ¥Y =),C+},1+},G+>(X-M). Here, C = consumption, I= investment,
G=governmental expenditures, (X-M) (export-import) = net export.

If the amount of the gross domestic product calculated in these three systems is
fairly the same, the measurement is considered to be correct. Due to the mistakes
in calculation, there may be some difference, but in the real sense, the result will
be the same.

6.3 Per Capita Gross Domestic Product

GDP per capita means the annual GDP per person. In a specific fiscal year, if the
total gross domestic product is divided by the total population, the GDP per
capita can be calculated,

the total gross domestic product of one year
ihe total population of that year.

As per formula, per capita GDP =

Per capita GDP is one of the indicators of the economic development and the
standard of living of a country, According to World Bank by this indicator, we
can determine if a country is developed or underdeveloped, or developing. If the
per capita GDP is more than a particular level, it has to be understood that the
country is developed, and if the per capita GDP is less, the country is to be

considered as under developed or developing. At present we do not measure in
this way, there is a new provision as a high, middle and low income countries.

6.4 Determinants of Gross Domestic Product (GDP)

The amount of the gross domestic product (GDP) of a country depends upon the
the amount and the productivity of its land and other natural resources, labour,
capital and technology. Therefore, they are called the determinants of the gross
domestic product.

1. Land: The gross domestic product depends on land and natural resources.
The gross domestic product will increase if satisfactory usage of the natural
resources is possible and if there is necessary fertile land for producing
B4 Economics

agricultural products. Therefore, land and natural resources are the
significant determinants of the gross domestic product.

2. Labour: Labour is a significant determinant of the gross domestic product of
a country. Skilled and efficient labour force is helpful for increasing the gross
domestic product. If the number of labourers increases and if they know the
use of technology, and are trained, it becomes helpful for increasing the gross
domestic product.

3. Capital: Capital is a fundamental determinant of increasing the gross
domestic product of a country. In the developed countries of today, capital
works at the root of increasing gross domestic product. On the other hand, the
developing and underdeveloped countries cannot increase their total national
income and the gross domestic product due io their lack of capital. Therefore,
capital is an important determinant of the gross domestic product.

4, Technology: The gross domestic product largely depends on technology.
Technology can be developed in many ways. For example, new inventions,
development of the design of the machinery and skills, invention of new
products, etc. As it can be seen, the use of highly productive seeds instead of
the regular seeds in the agricultural sector has increased the production of rice
many times. Similarly, the use of seeds of better quality has also resulted in
enhanced production of different vegetables, such as gourd, pumpkin, okra or
finger, etc. Technology basically enhances the productivity of the factors of
production. As a result, more production is possible with the same production
factors.

5. Mobility: The gross domestic product depends on the capacity to move the
resources from the economic activities that are lagging behind or
diminishing, to the newly expanding economic activities in an economy. For
example, it may be mentioned that in Bangladesh we can increase the use of
land and other factors in the production of rice, wheat or corm by decreasing
the production of jute.

2023
2025

National Income and Its Measurement 85

6.5 Factors not included in GDP Calculation

The total market price of the final products and services in an economy at a
specific time is known as the gross domestic product. The following factors are
never included while calculating GDP.

1. Capital gains and losses: With the change of time there may occur changes
in national resources or factors of a production institution or the price of the
produced goods resulting into profit or loss. This profit or loss is not counted
in calculating GDP. Because, the profit or the loss due to the change in the
ptice of the resources in course of time does not influence determining the
national income, Besides, this profit or loss is recorded only in the cases of an
individual business institution. While there is profit for one institution, the
same amount of loss occurs for another. So, the influence of profit or loss in
calculating the GDP is zero.

2. Intermediary goods and services: To calculate national income, only the
final goods and services are considered. Because, the prices of the
intermediary goods and services are included in the price of the final goods
and services. If the intermediary goods and services are considered again
after the final products, there will be the problem of double counting. For this
reason, the intermediary goods and services are not considered while
estimating the GDP.

3. Goods and services free of charge: There are some goods and services in
the economic system which are not bought or sold through market, e.g. a
mother rearing her children, the cooking and other household work of
women, a singer singing to his friends, these are not produced goods.
Therefore, while estimating the GDP, the value of these services cannot be
included.

4. No consideration for previous production and transaction: GDP
calculated for a certain year does not include any production of any previous
year in the GDP of that year, e.g. old cars, old houses or flats. The price of
these products is included in the GDP of that year when they were bought.
The problem of double counting will arise if these are calculated again.

Similarly, the exchange of stock, bond or any paper is not included in the
GDP.
&6 Economics

5. Interest on public debt: The interest against a governmental loan is not to
be included in the GDP. For example, the loan taken by the government
during a war, does not contribute to the national production. The interest
against this loan is taken to be the transferrable due. And therefore, it is
excluded from the GDP.

6. legal activities: Income from any illegal activity is not included in
estimating the national income. Illegal activities mean, any activity that is not
acceptable socially and is against the prevailing law of the country.

Task: Make a list of the goods and services that are not included in the
calculation of gross domestic product.

6.6 Method of Estimation of Gross National Product (GDP) in Bangladesh

Bangladesh Statistics Bureau is a government institution that is entrusted with the
responsibility of estimating the national income of Bangladesh, Estimating the
current market price and the fixed price of the goods and services, the Statistics
Bureau measures the GDP and the GNI every year. For these estimations the
institution has to collect data from different sources.

Bangladesh Statistics Bureau estimates the GDP and the GNI, using the
production approach and the expenditure approach. In the production approach,
to estimate the GDP, the economy is divided into 15 different sectors. These are:
Estimating the GDP in the Production Approach

Contribution of different sectors in gross national product (GDP) of Bangladesh

1. Agriculture and forest resources: Agriculture is an important sector of the
domestic product. It is difficult to estimate in any formatted way. To
estimate the GDP of Bangladesh, this sector is divided into three parts.

(a) Crops and vegetables: The amount of domestic product in this sector is
estimated from the perspective of the current wholesale market price. For
example, in 2019-2020 it was Tk. 1,83,019 crore.

2025
2025

National Income and Its Measurement a7

(b) Animal resources: The estimation of domestic product in this sector also is
done on the basis of the current market price. In this sub-sector of animal
resources. In 2019-2020 it was Tk. 46,673 crore.

(c) Forest resources: In the forest sector, because of the lack of data regarding
the factors, while estimating the GDP, 3% of the price of the total production
is deducted and the rest is considered to be the value added. In 2019-2020 it
was Tk, 35,490 crore.

2. Fish resources: GDP is calculated from the perspective of gathering fish
from the internal anc sea sources. In 2019-2020 it was Tk. 82.457 crore.

3. Minerals and mining: Minerals and mining is taken as a separate sector in
the industrial sector. In this sector, the market prices of (a) natural gas and
unrefined oil and (b) other mineral resources and produced goods from mining
are calculated. The calculation of these sectors are done in terms of gross
national product. In 2019-2020 it was Tk. 47,335 crore.

4. Industry (manufacturing): In the case of estimating GDP in Bangladesh,

the present market prices of the produced goods of all the industries are
calculated. In 2019-2020 it was Tk. 5,25,269 crore.

5. Wholesale and retail selling: In this calculation, the GDP product is
estimated by calculating the wholesale price of goods. In 2019-2020 it
was Tk, 28,449 crore.

6. Electricity, gas and water resources: GDP is estimated in this sector on the
basis of the value of supplying the services. This sector is very important for
Bangladesh. Alongside the government, this sector is extended privately,
too. In 2019-2020, the sum of these three sectors was Tk. 34,318 crore.

7. Construction: The gross domestic production in this sector is estimated
from the data received from the individual, the construction institutions, the
consumers and the government, In reality, the amount of income from this
sector is less, compared to what it should be because, the current market
BR

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Economics

price is more than the price set by the government. Whereas, GDP is
calculated based on the price that is fixed by the government. In 2019-2020
it was Tk. 2,24,167 crore.

Hotels and restaurants: The matter of gross domestic product in this sector
is estimated from the perspective of produced goods and the selling price of
the services. In 2019-2020 it was Tk. 2,48,764 crore.

Transport, preservation and communication: This sector is quite a big
one regarding the estimation of the domestic income. A big portion of this
sector belongs to the private sector. In 2019-2020 the total income in the
transport, preservation and communication sector was Tk. 1,01,130 crore.

Financial institutional services: The estimation of this sector depends on
the price received from the services. In the fiscal year 2019-2020, the
total income was Tk. 2,12,498 crore. As per the sub-sectors, the income was
$1,420, 7,504 and 5,341 crore taka respectively.

Real estate, rent and other businesses: The domestic production in this

sector is estimated on the basis of the income received from services. In
2019-2020 it was Tk. 1,11,799 crore.

Public administration and defence: The domestic income from this sector
is actually calculated from the expenditures. In 2019-2020 it was
Tk. 81,894 crore,

Education: In the education sector of Bangladesh the domestic product is
estimated from expenditures. In 2019-2020 it was Tk. 58.774 crore.

Health and social services: The estimation of the health and social services
is done by the expenditure approach. In 2019-2020 it was Tk. 2,87,827 crore.

Community, social, and personal services: The estimation of this sector is

also done from the expenditure approach. In 2019-2020 it was Tk. 2,26,228
crore.

[The Source of all information of this chapter: Bangladesh Economic Review 2020]

20125
National Income and Its Measurement 89

Exercise

Short questions

Z
3
4.
3

Give an idea of the gross domestic product.
What is meant by the gross national income?
What is meant by net national income?

Give the full form of GNI, GDP and NNI.
What is meant by CCA?

Descriptive questions

1.

2
3,

Ilfustrate the approaches of estimating national income.

Describe the determinants of gross domestic product.
Describe the matters that are not included in the accounts of the gross
domestic product.

Deseribe the contribution of sub-sectors of agriculture in national income
of Bangladesh.

Multiple-Choice Questions

Ls

2.

What is annual income per person?
a. national income b. net income

c. GDP d. per capita income

Which one of the following is taken into the estimation of national income?
a. price of the final goods and services

b. price of the intermediary goods and services

c. interest of governmental loan

d, income by corruption

Forma-12, Economics Class 9-10
90 Economics

Read the following passage and answer questions 3 and 4.

By sowing better quality seeds in the next year, Rumana got more vegetables
than what she got in the first year by sowing ordinary seeds on the compound of
her house.

3. For increasing production, the use of which one of the following did Rumana

change?
a. land b. labour
c. technology d. capital

4, This type of change in production

1. increases GDP.
ii. increases GNI.
ili. decreases NNI.

Which one of the following is correct?
a. bu

c. Land ii d. itand ii

Creative Questions

1. Event: 1

Shihab has been working in Bahrain for 10 years. Every month he sends a
portion of his income to his country.

Event: 2

Mrs Brownie is a British citizen. She is working at a private organization in
Bangladesh. She also sends money to her country every month.

a. What is net national income?
How 18 national income estimated by the income approach? Explain.
How is the sending of money by Shihab related to the estimation of
national income? Explain.

d. How would the income of Mrs. Brownie influence the national income
of Bangladesh? Give your own opinion.

2023
2025

National Income and Its Measurement 9]

9, Zahir went to his grandfather's home at Madhupur. [is grandfather has fish

in his pond. Zahir saw many trees and animals near his grandfather's house.
He came to know that it is a special kind of region.

a. What is the full form of CCA?
What is understood by gross domestic product?

Which sector of economy would the region that Zahir finds near his
grandfather's house be included in?

d, Analyse in the light of the textbook, the contribution of the pisciculture
by Zahir's grandfather in the economy of Bangladesh.
