2025

Chapter Three
Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium
In this chapter, utility, consumption, total utility, and marginal utility, law of

diminishing marginal utility, demand, supply, the market demand curve. market
supply curve and selection of the equilibrium price have been discussed.

After studying this chapter, we will be able to-

* illustrate the concept of utility;

* determine the relation between utility, consumption and consumers;
* prove that the total utility is the sum of marginal utilities;

* illustrate the law of diminishing marginal utility with a picture:

* elaborate the relation between price and the quantity of demand;

e elaborate the relation between price and the quantity of supply and

e determine the equilibrium price and quantity.
36 Economics

3.1 Utility, Consumption and Consumer

A person uses goods and services in accordance with their importance to fulfill
his unlimited wants. The goods and services that have the power to fulfill human
wants is called utility, The definitions of utility, consumption and consumer are
given below:

Utility: A person needs many goods and materials for their survival. Many other
things are necessary along with food and clothes. Without these, we cannot live
a normal life. For example, food, clothes, books, services of the doctor, ete.
satisfy the demands of human beings. Therefore, in economics, the capability of
any goods that satisfies. People’s need is termed as utility, Utility is a
psychological idea.

Consumption: Every day we use rice, fish, pen, clock, cloths or we consume
these things. Here, consumption does not, however, only stand for finishing
ihese off. Because, we cannot actually destroy or finish anything. By using the
goods we can just get their utility. We have to keep in mind that if the utility of
any goods is destroyed in any way other than satisfying a need, it will not be
considered as consumption. That is, in economics, to finish the utility of any
goods for the purpose of satisfying a want or need, is known as consumption.

Consumer: The person who consumes is called a consumer. That is, other than
the freely accessible goods, the person who is prepared to spend money to
consume any other goods is known as the consumer.

From the above definition, it is realised utility, consumption and consumer are

strongly related. The consumers get utility by consuming the goods and using
the services.

Task: Mention two differences between consumption and the consumer,

3.2 Total Utility and Marginal Utility
Total Utility

Going to the market, you want to buy more than one mango to eat. The money
that you spend to buy the first mango is not the money that you spend to buy the

2023
i
a
™

Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 37

second or the third or fourth mango. Because, after consuming the first mango,
your wish to eat mango is satisfied to quite an extent. Your wish to eat a mango
for the second time is lessened. In the stage of the third or fourth mango, it will
be even lesser. It might even be possible that you will not buy any more
mangoes. Because, you do not have the wish to eat mangoes any longer, in other
words, the utility of extra mangoes to you is zero. To buy mangoes, you have to
spend money. Let us assume that you buy the first mango for 5 tk, the second for
4 tk, the third for 3 tk and the fourth for 2 tk, Thus, you buy 4 mangoes for
(5+4+3+2)=tk 14, If money is taken as the measure of utility, the total utility of
four mangoes is 14, Therefore, the sum of the satisfaction from different units of
goods derived at a particular time is known as the total utility. Since the extra
mangoes gradually give lesser satisfaction, therefore, with the increment of
consumption, the total utility increases at a decreasing rate.

Marginal Utility

Suppose, you have bought 3 mangoes. Now you buy another mango. This fourth
extra mango is the marginal mango. From this marginal mango, the satisfaction
or the utiliny you get is the marginal utility. If you have spent tk 2 to buy this
mango, then the marginal utility will be tk 2. That is, the utility one can get by
consuming one extra unit of goods or service is marginal utility.

Presentation of Total Utility and Marginal Utility by a List

Unit of Goods (mangoes) | Total Utility (in taka) Marginal Utility (in taka)
Ist 5 5
2nd 54+4=9 4
3rd 94+3=12 3
4th 12+2=14 2
Sth l441=15 1
6th 154+0=15 0
Tth 15-1=14 -1

Tt is seen in the list above that when the price of the lst mango is tk 5, the
marginal utility is tk 5. Buying the 2nd mango makes the total cost tk 9. The total
38 Economics

utility derived from 2 mangoes ts tk 9. And the marginal utility derived from the
2nd mango is 4. This way, utility derived from 4 mangoes is 14. The marginal
utility of the 4th mango is 2. And thus the marginal utility, chronologically is, 5,
4,3, 2. 1,0, and -1 tk. And you will not buy the 6th mango since it has no utility
to you. Your total utility will decrease at the time of buying 7th mango as it has
negative marginal utility.

From the above diagrams it is seen, the total utility is the summation of the unit
of consumed goods and additional one unit utility is marginal utility. According
to the increasing of consumed goods, the total utility is decreasing slowly and
also the marginal utility decreases slowly. When the total utility becomes the
highest, the marginal utility becomes zero. When the total utility decreases, the
marginal utility becomes negative.

| Task: Write down four differences between total utility and marginal utility. |

3.3 The Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility

From the example above, it is observed that if you eat the same quantity of
mangoes repeatedly, your interest towards mangoes diminishes, and so does the
utility. Since the utility falls, you want to pay less for one extra unit of mango.
The marginal utility of the 6th mango is O and the marginal utility of the 7th
mango is negative. That means to consume the same product over and over again
causes the marginal utility to diminish accordingly. This tendency of the
marginal utility to fall due to the increase in the unit of consumption is known as
the diminishing law of marginal utility. The diminishing law of marginal utility
maintains some conditions. These are: a) the consumer should have general
capacity of judgement; b) the consumer can measure the utility of the goods in
terms of money if they wish to; c) the price of the goods is to be equal to the
marginal utility; d) there will be no change in the income, taste and liking of the

consumer while consuming the goods; ¢) a particular time is considerable.

Illustration of the Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility by a Diagram

“4
S
|

It is possible to show the diminishing law of marginal utility by a diagram. In the
picture below, the horizontal axis (OX) will show the quantity of mangoes
2025

Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 39

and the vertical axis (OY) will show the marginal utility and the price.

Diagram:
¥
5M
#5 aN ay
2 N
B b
-
E> fs
3 2 4,
r=) x
2! :
NG £
O badb Deda de 6 x
Quantity of mange (unit) a
Nu
Diminishing marginal utility curve

In the diagram, the amount of mangoes in the horizontal axis and the marginal
utility and price in the vertical axis are indicated.

In the picture, you get aal quantity of utility or marginal utility from the 1st
mango and you pay tk 5 for the lst mango. With the increase of consumption,
from the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th mango, you gain bb1, ccl, ddl and ee] quantities
of marginal utility respectively. That means, with the increasing consumption,
you would agree to pay tk 4 for the 2nd mango, tk 3 for the 3rd, tk 2 for the 4th,
ik 1 for the 5th. The marginal utility of the 6th mango is zero and the marginal
utility of the 7th is negative, i.e. tk -1.00. The point f on the horizontal axis
shows the zero marginal utility. And the marginal utihty of the 7ih mango is
negative (tk-1) which is shown by ggl. Here, ee,<dd,<cc,<bb,<aa,. From
this we can understand that with the increasing consumption of mangoes the
utility of the extra units gradually decreases for you. Now we can get the MU
(Marginal Utility) line by connecting the points, al, bl, cl, dl, el, fl, and g1.
The line is sloping on the right hand side. Here we can observe that with the
increase in the quantity of consumption, the marginal utility is gradually
decreasing. And that is why the marginal utility line is sloping downwards.
40 Economics

3.4 Demand

We, in our daily life, want to get many things. A car, a beautiful house, good
foods, etc. But all our wants are not demands. Three conditions are to be
fulfilled to make a demand in economics, c.g. 1. the wish to get any goods 2.
Necessary monetary capacity to buy and 3. the wish to spend money to get that
goods, Therefore, if a buyer has the wish to buy some goods, the capacity to buy
it and the wish to buy it at fixed price, then it is called a demand in economics.

The Law of Demand: Your mother asked your father to bring a hilsha fish from
the market. Returning from the market, your father was annoyed and told her that
the price of the hilsha fish was very high for him and it was not possible to buy
it. That means, due to the rise in price, there is no demand for the hilsha fish to
your father. Another day, your father returns home with two hilsha fish in his
hand and said with a smiling face that today the price of the hilsha fish is low
and that is why he bought two hilshas. So, there is a close relation between
the demand and the price.

Therefore, by the law of demand, we understand, "all else being constant or
unchanged, at a particular time, if the price of the goods falls the quantity of
demand rises and if the price rises, the quantity of demand falls." [price (1
Demand 4) again price (J) Demand ())]. The other factors being constant means
here, the taste of the buyer, habit, likings will not be changed and the income
of the buyer and the price of the alternative goods will also remain unchanged,

etc. If the other circumstances are changed. the law of demand does not become
effective and the demand curve shifts right or left.

Drawing the Demand Curve from the Demand Schedule

We have seen in the law of demand that there is an inverse or négative
relationship between price and demand. That means, when the price of the
goods increases, quantity demanded falls, on the other hand. when the price
falls, demand rises. This concept. when presented by a schedule, is called the
demand schedule. Therefore, it can be said that the schedule through which the
different quantities of demands for goods bought at different prices at a
particular time is called the demand schedule or demand list.

20125
Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 41

Demand Schedule or Demand List

Price of each unit of goods (in taka) Quantity of demand (unit)
8.00 4
6.00 8
4.00 12
2.00 16

In the schedule we can see that, when the price of one unit of goods ts tk 8, a
consumer buys 4 units of the goods. When the price falls to tk 6, tk 4 and tk 2,
the demand rises to 8 units, 12 units and 16 units respectively. The inverse
relation between price and demand is shown in the demand schedule.

From the demand schedule above, we can draw the demand curve.

Demand Curve Y
Es} So
2 :
26 R
=
8 4 5
a N\ .
SD
Qo. 4. 8 12 16 5
Quantity of Demand (Unit)

In the diagram above, the horizontal axis or the OX axis shows the quantity of
demand and the vertical axis or OY axis shows the price of the goods. When the
price of the goods is tk 8 the quantity of demand is 4 units. If two
perpendiculars are drawn using the price 8 tk and the quantity 4 units, they
intersect at the point Q. Likewise, 8 units at tk 6, 12 units al tk 4 and 16 units at
tk 2 is shown at the points R, S and T. Now, if we join the points Q, R, 8, and T,
we will get the DD line. This DD line is the demand curve. The points on the DD

Forma-6, Economics Class 9-10
42 Economics

line are indicating the different quantitics of demand at different prices of the
goods.

This way we can draw the demand curve from the demand schedule according
to the demand law. It is worth mentioning that we have drawn here the demand
curve of regular goods,

Task: Mention three differences between the demand schedule and the demand
curve.

3.5 Drawing the Market Demand Curve

A personal demand curve can be drawn from a person's demand schedule.
Similarly, it is also possible to draw a market demand curve. The sum total of the
personal or different demands of all the consumers at a particular price in the
market is known to be the market demand. For the convenience of our
understanding, we will presume that the number of the consumers at the market
is two. A market demand curve is drawn below from the personal demand
schedules of the two consumers.

The Market Demand Schedule
Demand of the 1st Demand of the 2nd =| = Maket demand (Q)
| Price of the good (tk) consumer (Q,} consumer (Q,)} (Q=Q,+Q,)
Unit of the goods (quintal} | Unit of the goods (quintal) | Unit of the goods (quintal),
6.00 5 10 15
4.00 10 15 25
2,00 15 20 35

The schedule above shows the demands of the Ist and the 2nd consumer at
different prices of goods. Now it will be shown how the market demand
schedule is prepared from the individual demand schedule of these two
consumers.

The demand curve that shows the quantities of any goods that different persons
are prepared to buy at different prices is known as the market demand curve.

2025
2025

Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 43

The market demand curve can be drawn by summing up the demand curves of

the Ist and the 2nd consumers side by side.

Diagram:
¥ ¥ ¥
3
Ely b
Bs i 6 4 A
tat
= di rr +
‘S
ra ; =.) Ne F
é 7 4b
[* * 0 » 0 ie:
o 5 if 18 30 0 § (9 48 20 Oo 5 10 18 20°28 30 35
Quanbty demanded of Ist Quantity demanded of and Quantity of market
consumer (Quintal) consumer (Quintal) demand (Quintal)

Individaal demand curve for Ist and 2nd consumer and market demand curve.

In the diagrams above, the personal demand curves of the Ist and the 2nd
consumers are D1D] and D2D2 respectively, When the price of the goods is tk
6, the quantities of demand of the 1st and the 2nd consumers are 5 quintals and
10 quintals and the market demand, therefore, will be (5 quintals + 10 quintals)
= 15 quintals, which is shown on the market demand curve by the point R. The
price falling to tk 4 and tk 2 has resulted in the personal demands of the 1st and
the 2nd consumer being (10 quintals + 15 quintals) = 25 quintals and (15
quintals + 20 quintals) = 35 quintals respectively, which has been shown in the
market demand curve by the points Sand T. Now let us join the points R, $ and T
to draw the DD demand curve. This is known as the market demand curve. The
market demand curve is the horizontal summation of individual demand curve.
For this reason, the market curve is more flatter than individual demand curves.

3.6 Supply

When we go to the market, we will find that the retailers have displayed in their
shops their various kinds of goods for selling. But we do not name this as supply.
In economics, the quantity of a kind of goods that a producer is willing and
capable to sell at a specified time and at a specific price is known as supply. It
may be mentioned here that one kind of goods, a specified time and a specific
price are a matter of important consideration here. Therefore, the different
44 Economics

quantities of a product that a producer is willing to sell at different prices are
called supply in economics.

The Law of Supply

We buy and sell goods every now and then at the market. When will a
producer/seller be interested to sell their product? Definitely when the price of
the product is high at the market, only then the producer will be willing to sell
ihe product. Suppose, when the price of potatoes is tk 15 per kg, the seller will
sell 2 quintals of potatoes. If the price rises to tk 20 the producer will be willing
to supply more potatoes. Let us think, the supply then will be 3 quintals. That
is, with the rise of the price of the goods the supply of the goods also increases
and with the fall of the price the supply decreases. Therefore, the relationship of
price and supply is direct or positive. As the price changes, the supply also
changes. That means, all else being constant, (e.g. factors like price and
technology and normal time are to be considered), if the price raises, the
corresponding quantity of supply rises and as price falls, the corresponding
quantity of supply falls. That is, such a direct relation of supply with price is
called law of supply. If the other circumstances are changed, the law of demand
does not become effective and the demand/ supply curve shifts right or left.

Drawing the Supply Curve from the Supply Schedule

We have seen above the price of the goods rises, the quantity of supply increases
and when the price falls, the quantity of supply also falls. This direct change of
supply due to the change of price can be shown in a supply schedule.

The price of the goods is shown mathematically on one side of the supply
schedule and on the other, the supply.

The Supply Schedule

| Price of each unit of the product (in taka) Quantity of Supply (quintal)
10.00 10
20.00 20
| 30.00 30
40.00 [ 40

2023
2025

Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 45

It is seen in the schedule that the supply of some goods is 10 quintals when the
price of that good is tk 10 per quintal. When the price rises to tk 20, tk 30 and tk
40, the quantity of supply becomes 20 quintals, 30 quintals, and 40 quintals
respectively. Thus the law of supply is reflected in the supply schedule.

The Supply Curve

The quantity of supply increases if the price of a product rises, and the quantity
of supply falls if the price falls. When this direct change of supply,
corresponding to the change of the price is shown by a curve or diagram, it is
called the supply curve.

How the supply curve is drawn from the supply schedule is shown below.

In the diagram, the supply of the goods is shown in

¥ the horizontal axis or the OX axis and the OY axis
g Ss or the vertical axis indicates the price of the good.
S i D When the price of the goods is tk 10, the quantity
B c of supply of the goods is then LO quintal. They
qo) hb connect at the point A. Thus, when the prices of
8 the goods are tk 20, tk 30 and tk 40, the supplies
a 1obs of the goods are then 20 quintals, 30 quintals and

4 40 quintals respectively. They are connected at the

10 20 30 40 quinal 8 points B, C and D. Now if we connect the points
Quantity of supply A, B, C and D, we will get the SS line. This is the
supply curve.

3.7 Drawing the Market Supply Curve

Ait a specified time, the different quantities of goods that a salesman supplies at
different prices is known as the personal or individual supply. On the other
hand, the quantity of goods that all the salesmen supply ai a specific time at
different prices is known to be the market supply. Summing up the individual
supply schedules of all the salesmen, the markei supply schedule can be
prepared. Here lollows a brief and simplified market supply schedule—
46 Economics

Market Supply Schedule
Supply of the Ist Supply of the 2nd | Market supply
Price of the producer ($;) producer (S2) S=8)/ +83
Goods (taka) Unit of goods (quintal) | Unit of goods (quintal) | Unit of goods (quintal)
10.00 100 50 150
15.00 150 75 | 225
20.00 200 100 300

In the table above, the supply of the Ist and the 2nd salesmen is shown. How the
market supply curve with the supplied goods of the two salesmen can be drawn

is shown below.

x 51 ¥ §2 ¥ Ss
G
2 20 0
oa
é %
4 15 ab 15
ce :
‘5 Td 10 itt)
a
az]
= os 5 5
= oe S
o 50 10) 10) 2D * oo 4 50 75 100 By qo ano
Quastiry sugplied Let seller (quintal) Qaantity saaplind 2nd seller (quintals Qmaarirg of marker supply tquintals

Individual & market supply for Ist & 2nd sellers

In the diagrams above, $181 and $282 are the individual supply curves of the Ist
and the 2nd salespersons. When the price of the goods is tk 10 the quantities of
supply of the Ist and the 2nd salespersons are 100 quintals and 50 quintals
respectively, and the market supply will, therefore, be (100+50)=150 quintals.
This is shown by the point A in the diagram. When the price rises to tk 15, the
quantities of the individual supplies of the 1st and the 2nd salespersons will be
150 quintals and 75 quintals and the market supply will be (1504+75)=225
quintals. This is shown by the point B. When the price rises even more to tk 20,
the quantities supplied by the Ist and the 2nd salespersons will be 200 and 100
quintals. The quantity of the total supply will be (200+100)—300 quintals, which
is indicated by the pomt C in the diagram. Now we can draw the line SS by
joining the points A, B and C, This is known as the market supply curve. The
market supply curve is the summation of horizontal individual supply curve. For

2025
2025

Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 47

this reason, the market supply curve is more flatter than imdividual supply
Curves.

Task: Refer to 3 differences between supply schedule and supply curve.

3.8 Determining Equilibrium Price and Quantity

An ordinary picture of the market is the bargain between the buyer and the seller
for the price of the goods. The buyer tries to buy the goods at the lowest possible
price. On the other hand, the seller tries to sell them at the highest possible price.
Through this bargain between the buyer and the seller, ultimately the goods are
bought or sold at a price where the demand and the supply are the same. The
price at which the demand and the supply are the same is known to be the
equilibrium price. At the equilibrium price the quantity of the goods that is bought
or sold is known as the equilibrium quantity,

In the below, the equilibrium price and quantity of market are explamed through
a co-ordinated demand and supply curve.

Table: Determining the equilibrium price and quantity of market

Price of goods (Taka) | Demand of goods (Unit) | Supply of goods (Unit)
5 6 2
10 4 4
15 2 6

From the above chart, when the price of the goods is Tk. 10, then the demand and
supply of the market is same. It means the balance price is Tk. 10 and the balance
quantity is 4 unit. We can also explain it through the help of the chart below.

A

D a
NG

Price of goods (taka}

ny

T

1
. ——
‘i

i,

1

| \

1

A

i

I
a

1

i

!

!

o 2 4 6 x
Quantity of demand & supply (quintal)
Figure: Determine equilibrium price & quantity
48 Economics

The chart indicates, when the price of the goods is Tle. 5 then its demand is 6 unit
and supply unit is 2. For this reason, demand is greater than supply. As a result,
the price of the goods will be increased.

On the other hand, when the price of the goods is Tk. 15 and its demand is 2 unit.
The supply unit becomes 6. In this case, supply is greater than demand and
ultimately the price of the goods will be decreased.

But when the price of the goods is Tk. 10 and the demand unit is 4 which is 4. In
that case demand is equal to supply and the market will be stabilize which is
called market stabilization.

In the graph intersection dot E is the equilibrium dot of market demand and
supply where the equilibrium price is Tk. 10 and the quantity of equilibrium is 4
unit.

Task: Present the diagram of determining the Equilibrium price on poster
paper in the class.

Exercise

Short Questions
1. What is utility?

2. What is meant by consumption and consumer?

3. What is meant by total utility and marginal utility?
4. Define demand. What is the law of demand?

5. What is the market demand curye?

6. What is the law of supply?

Descriptive Questions
1. Explain the diminishing law of marginal uttlity.
2. Describe the process of drawing a demand curve from an imaginary
demand schedule.
3. Draw a market demand curve from imaginary demand schedule of
two consumers.
4. Draw supply curve from an imaginary supply schedule.

Explain the concept of determining the equilibrium price by a diagram.

20125
Dtility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 49
Multiple-Choice Questions

1. How many conditions are there for demand in economics?
a. 2 b. 3
c. 4 d. 5
2. Which of the conditions below is compulsory for market equilibrium?
a. the point where demand = supply b. the point where demand > supply
c, the point where supply > demand d. the point where supply = demand

Read the following passage and answer question numbers 3 and 4.

Tahsin bought a guava and ate it at the school. Here, the utility schedule of his guava is

given below —
Unit of the goods Total utility (in taka) Marginal utility (in taka)
1 5 5
2 9 4
3 12

3. What is the marginal utility of Tahsin's 3rd guava?

a, tk5 b, tk4

ec. tk3 d. tk2
4, In the behaviour of Tahsin

i. anordinary situation is expressed.

ii, the attraction towards the guava is unchanged.

iii, the marginal utility of the guava has gradually decreased.
Which of the following is correct?

ao bi and iii

¢. 1and iii d, i, ii and iii

Forma-7, Economics Class 9-10
50 Economics

Creative Questions
l, The demand schedule of the goods 'X' of person 'A' and person 'B' is given
here —
Price per unit of the goods The quantity of demand The quantity of demand

(in taka) of person ‘A’ (quiatal) of person 'B' (quintal)
Tk 20 5 7
Tk 15 10 1]
Tk 10 15 15

a. What is utility?

b. Elaborate the relation between total utility and marginal utility.

&. Draw the demand curve of person 'A' from the demand schedule of the
goods 'X', and explain it.

d. Draw the market demand curve of the goods "X' and compare with it
the demand curve of person 'A’.

Going to market Sujan finds that the price of potatoes is tk 25 per kg. He
wants to buy 120 kg of potatoes, but Karim wants to sell 160 kg of potatoes
at the same price. When the price of potatoes falls to tk 20 the next day,
Sujan buys 140 kg of potatoes and Karim sells 140 kg of potatoes.

a. Whatis demand?

b. Explain the law of demand.

c. Draw the supply curve for the potatoes of Karim and explain it.

d. Do you think that Sujan and Karim could reach at the equilibrium price
at the market for potatoes? Give reasons for your answer.

2025
2025

Chapter Four
Production & Organisation

Sharbat is one kind of produced goods. Water, lemon, sugar, etc are necessary to
prepare sharbat. Utilizing meredients, it is possible to produce goods or to create
utility or satisfaction, And this is done by an organisation. For production,
ingredients like water, sugar, lemon, etc. are needed. There has to be a planning
of how the production is to be done. Different people perform different activities
during the production; these activities are to be distributed according to the
qualifications and skills. Finally the produced goods have to be taken to the
market, An organisation performs these types of work. If the organisation is not
skilled, it is not possible to enhance production.

After studying this chapter, we will be able to-

ae os

illustrate the idea of production;

explain the relation between production and producer:

describe the factors of production;

discuss an organisation and its growth;

explain the relation between average and marginal production;

illustrate the idea of production cost;

identify visible cost and invisible cost;

determine the difference between personal and social costs;

be interested in productive work and enterprise and

present the law of diminishing marginal product with a schedule and graph.
52 Economics

4.1 Production and Producer

Production basically means creating utility. The produced goods have to have an
exchange cost. On the other hand, if utility is not produced, it is not called
production. To create a new product or utility using the factors or the primary
products is known to be production. For example, bread is made using flour, salt,
water, roller, etc. Bread is produced goods. We satisfy our hunger eating bread.
That is, utitlity has been created by making bread. We can get bread for money
or in exchange for any other product. That is, there is an exchange cost for the
new product, bread. If breads are produced for business purpose, these bread
sometimes need to be taken to the market. The organization supervises all the
activities from the collection of ingredients to taking the produced goods to the
market place. For example, the organization supervises what materials are
needed, where they will be brought from, who will bring them, who will prepare
the mould by mixing the salt, flour, water. who will roll the breads, who will
bake the breads, who will take these to the market, at what price they will be sold
etc. [f all these things are not supervised by the organiser skillfully, the highest
quantity of production cannot be ensured from a fixed quantity of factors or
ingredients. One individual can be the organiser and the producer. For example
a small/medium farmer who grows crops in his own fields is a producer and an
organiser at the same time. But the owner of a factory who works in his own
factory as a manager and runs his factory by the labourers is an organiser not a
producer. Again the owner of a factory who runs his factory appointing a
manager and produces goods by the labourers is neither an organiser nor a
producer. He is only an owner. The owner, who takes part in productive activities
and supervises other producers, is an owner, producer and organiser at the same
time.

The process of production or creating utility is shown in five stages, e.g.

1. Transformative Production: Producing new goods by transformation is
known to be transformative production e.g. transforming wood
convemently into bed, chair, table, etc. These products therefore, are
transformative production.

2023
2025

Production & Organisation 53

2.

Regional Production: Utility incteases when some goods are moved from
one place to another. For exarnple, wood from the forest is usually used as
fuel by the people who live near the forest. If these wood is brought to the
city, people can make attractive furniture from this wood and thus its
utility increases. Furthermore, flower is not appreciated in the forest. On the
other hand, if that plant with flowers 1s planted on the compound of a house
in the city, it is far more appreciated, that 1s, its utility increases.

Time-Based Production: The production and utility of many goods increase
in the course of time. These are known as time-based production, e.g. the
outturn of paddy is more at the monsoon in Poush and Magh. On the other
hand, at this time the price of paddy is less. Storing the paddy at this time
to sell it in the months of Vadra-Aswin will bring higher prices.

. Service-Based Production: The production that people produce by their

services is called the service-based production. The teacher makes
people educated by giving lessons, the doctor keeps the health of the people
well by giving treatment, in other words, they sustam or merease the

production capacity.

Ownership-Based Production: [t is possible to ensure superfluous
production by changing the ownership of some of the economic goods and
services. For example, a farmer can produce by buying an unused land
and tilling it or can increase the production through better‘improved
cultivation by buying a used land.

You have got the idea of creating utility through production, Now you will know

about the people involved in production. Ramzan Ali is a farmer. He has 3
bighas of agricultural land. In this land, Ramzan produces paddy in one
monsoon, and wheat in the other. In-between the production of paddy and wheat,
he grows vegetables. As the factors of production for all these crops, he uses
seeds, fertilizers, water, insecticides, machines for harvesting. His family
members help him in these activities.
54 Economics

Task: (1) Classify the changed situation given below according to the different types
of production. (a) fish-pond, (b) work of the soldier, (c) affection of the parents,
(d) giving the property of the father to the children, (¢) making instruments from
iron, (f) flour from wheat (g) sugar from the sugarcane, (h) rice from paddy, cakes
from rice, (i) transporting the bananas, fruits, vegetables from the village to the city,
(j) selling the potatoes of the month Agrahayan in the month of Ashar.

Task: (2) Refer if Ramzan Ali is to be termed as a producer or an organizer.

4.2 Factors of Production

Suppose in your area, wheat, potatoes, bananas, rice and some other agricultural
goods are produced alongside some industrial goods like cloths, biscuits, plastic,
etc. To produce these agricultural and industrial goods, many factors are
necessary. For the farmer, to produce rice, he needs land, seeds, fertilizers, plow,
irrigation, labour, etc. On the other hand, to produce industrial goods, factory,
building, cloth, threads, machines, electricity, gas, flour, sugar, oil and labour are
necessary. To produce these goods, natural resources like soil, the fertility of
soil, light and air, environment, mineral resources, sunlight, water, and many
other things are necessary. The goods that are mentioned here are factors of
production. That means the goods and services that are necessary for any kind of
production, are called factors of production.

There are basically four types of factors in production. For example, 1. Land, 2.
Labour, 3. Capital, 4. Organisation.

1. Land: The natural resources that help production, are called land. For
example, land, soil and the richness of the soil, minerals, forests and water
resources, the sun-ray, rainfall, weather, and all the other types of natural
resources are included in land.

2. Labour: Every kind of physical and mental labour of humans that is used
for the purpose of production is called labour. The physical labour of a
farmer, a fisherman, a blacksmith, a potter and the labourer of the industry
of ready-made clothes is labour, The physical and intellectual labour of the
officer and staff is also called labour. Similarly, the teachings of a teacher,
services of a doctor and the counselling of a lawyer are all labour.

2025
2025

Production & Organisation 55

3. Capital: Capital is the factor of production that is produced by human
beings. They use this produced factor for further production and not for
consumption, e.g. instruments, raw materials, factories, office furniture and
so on.

4. Organisation: The organisation is known as a synthesizer. To direct the act
of production by bringing harmony amongst the other factors of production
like land, labour and capital is known as organisation. To adjust and to direct
the course of actions is also termed as management. The person who
conducts this work is known as the organiser or entrepreneur. Therefore, the
varied tasks of an entrepreneur, like planning for producing something,
bringing the land, labour, and capital together and combining them and
directing the act of production, taking the risk, all are included in
organisation.

So, it is a must that in the entire production system, land, labour, capital and
organisation, all these four factors participate. Production is not possible with
any one of these being absent. However, in the production arena, the importance
of all these factors is not equivalent. Depending on the situation. some of the
factors are needed more, and some are needed less. Since Bangladesh is an
agriculture-based and heavily populated country, land and labour are more
important than capital here. On the other hand, in the industrialist countnes like
Japan, the Unites States and others, capital is more significant than land and
labour.

Task: (1) What could be the important factors of production in the perspective of our
country?

Name of the country Important factors used in production

Bangladesh is an agriculture-based cOUMUTy | w.eesseecseecsesenceeeaternseseereeneseneeeenente

Japan ig an imdustrialist country | sassecssscecsssceetseesetsensesseceescsecetesestetees

| Task: (2) Arrange the factors as per their importance in the production sector.

Sector of production Factors according to their importance are
Agmenltre qj- jj. (j=  - |  cjesartencyjsivans ctwimeenatn aaeaeres
Industry

56 Economics

4.3 Organisation and Its Development

Ayesha Begum has built a poultry farm in her house amidst all her household
work. Throughout the year, eggs are produced from this farm. One year later,
Ayesha went to visit a governmental fisheries project and after that the idea of
pisciculture drew her attention. Within one year, from the neat income of selling
eggs from her poultry farm, which is twenty thousand taka, she built a pond on
the two bighas of land beside her home and started a fisheries project. Some
more labourers are recruited in both the farms. Ayesha's income increases from
selling eggs from her poultry and after one year from selling the fishes of the
pond. Her savings also increase even after meeting the expenditures on the
education of her three children and all those of her household. As Ayesha's work
grows in volume, her husband, Rahmat Ali leaves his job in the city and comes
to join his wite's farm, With both of their enterprises, they manage to acquire
some land, poultry and fisheries. They also employ 12 men and women. They
train each of the labourers. By turn, Ayesha and Rahmat supervise the labourers
and their farms. They also manage to marketize the eggs and fishes in the
market place. Sceing their success, many other villagers follow their example
and begin to develop poultry farms and fisheries throughout the village and
areas in the vicinity. To take the eggs and fishes, the wholesalers from different
areas now come regularly to Ayesha's village. Within a number of years, the
whole area achieves economic success through agriculture, poultry farming
and fishery projects. Poultry stock and fish are now produced in this area for
business purpose.

Can we say that Ayesha Begum is an organiser? Have her organising
capabilities developed?

It is certain from the above discussion that to conduct and control productive
activities for the purpose of business can be called organisation. In the true
sense, production and control of business and management are almost
impossible without an organisation. In the modern world, different people
play different roles in the production activities. The organiser distributes these
responsibilities skillfully according to their efficiency. Thus, with the help of the

20125
Production & Organisation 37

workers, different jobs in the production and business are done. But while
completing the tasks a kind of mutual authority and responsibility is created
amongst the workers. This structure of reciprocal authority and responsibility is
organisation. Therefore, organisation is the base of business.

Tt is the duty of the organisational structure to hold together the different parts of
the organisation and to prepare the necessary arrangement to achieve the goal.
Apart from that, distributing the responsibilities of different activities,
developing rules and regulations, etc are included in the structure of
organisation. The organisational structure is dependent on the extent of the
business, the nature and volume of the produced goods, the character of the
industry, the process of production, skills of the labourers and many other
things.

The clear picture of the management structure of an institution, which is clearly
visible when the posts of the superior and inferior workers are arranged
hierarchically discerning the different divisions of the organisational structure
of the business, the sub-divisions and the branches, is called the picture of an
organisation. The success of the business will grow as much as the management
of organisation will be well-arranged and proper. Therefore, organisation is the
fundamental and main aspect of business.

| Task: Make a list of the organisational tasks.

A good organisation has some particular tendencies or characteristics, They are—

1. The Purpose and Nature of Business: The purpose of the business needs to
be determined in the first step of organisation. According to the purpose and
nature of business, the organisational structure of the business has to be built.
Tt has to be determined which one among these possible purposes is the main
and which one is subsidiary, or which one is short-termed and which ts
long-termed.

2, Deciding on the Business Activities: After deciding properly the purpose
and nature of the business, all the activities of the business are analysed, e.g.
production, buying and selling, arranging for money, employing labourers

Forma-8, Economics Class 9-10
Economics

and workers, managing labourers and owner relationship, etc. For these,
maintaining the finance, advertising and publicizing, storing the goods,

management, etc are necessary.

Division of Activities: After analysing the activities according to the
similarities in type and purpose of the activities, they are divided into some
groups. The associate activities in one group are again divided into some
sub-divisions, for example, the production sector, buying sector, selling
sector, financial sector, publicizing sector, etc. Sometimes some businesses
are divided regionally also. Some divisions together are considered as
regional divisions.

Distributing Responsibilities: Each worker in the business is entrusted with
one particular responsibility. The particular duty of each of the worker in
each division and sub-division is set in accordance with his/her experience,
capacity and skills and each is given the task in which she/he is expert and
skilled.

Distributing Authority and Duties: To assign a duty means to give the
proper executive power of fulfilling a responsibility. Each worker is to be
given the right to work freely, uninterruptedly and properly. The superior
officer hands over one part of their authority or power to workers working
under their command, On the other hand, the junior worker is accountable
for their work to their superior. An organization is successful when these two
opposite streams are persistent.

4.4 Total, Average and Marginal Production

Mr. Komol grows 600 quintals of wheat [rom his one-bigha land employing 10
labourers. Here, 60 quintals of wheat is grown by each labourer on an average.
This 60 quintals of wheat per labourer is called average production. In the next
season, 655 quintals of wheat is grown employing 11] labourers. Compared to
the last year, the production has increased by 55 quintals. This production of
655-600 = 55 quintals of wheat is known as marginal production. That is,

2023
2025

Production & Organisation 29

employing an extra labourer (11") the production is increased by 55 quintals.
The 11" labourer is the marginal labourer. So the production of the marginal
labourer is 55 quintals. Therefore, here 600 quintals is the total production, 60
quintals is the average production and 55 quintals is the marginal production.
The total, average and marginal production can be explained by the law of
diminishing marginal returns.

4.5 Law of Diminishing Marginal Returns

Keeping the production strategy and all the other factors fixed in the process of
production, if only one factor is increased, as a result, the production primarily
rises at an increasing rate. At one point, if the factor is used more, production
rises at a diminishing rate. This law of increasing production with the usage of
factors is known as the Law of Diminishing Marginal Returns.

Usually in the agricultural sector, this law is applicable while attempting to
increase production. It is worth mentioning that, in the first stage, production can
stow more, compared to the increase in the factors. Suppose, we have two
factors which are land and labour. The amount of land is stable. Primarily, when
the amount of labour is less, as the labour rises, there remains sufficient land for
the marginal labour. Therefore, marginal production increases. That is,
production rises at an increasing rate. But, to increase production, if the factors
are continuously engaged in a higher amount, the marginal production
diminishes. The reason behind this is a engaging extra labour results in a lesser
amount of land for each unit of labour. Therefore, production increases at a
diminishing rate.

This is known as the law of diminishing marginal returns. This law can be
illustrated by the table in the next page:
60 Economics

Table: The law of diminshing Marginal Returns

Labour factor Total Marginal Average

Amount of |(Jabour hour of | Combination] production | production | production
land (stable) | the labourer) | of factors (quintal) | (quintal) | (quintal)

1 hector 1 A 10 10 10

1 hector 2 B 24 14 12

| hector 3 c 36 12 12

| hector 4 D 46 10 11.5

| hector 5 E 54 8 10.8

| hector 6 F 60) 6 10

1 hector 7 G 60 0 8.57

1 hector 8 H 56 -4 7

From this table relationship among total, average anc marginal production can
be explained.

Total production: Total production means the total amount of produced goods
by using specific factors in a specific time. Here the quantity of land remains
fixed. The total amount of goods that can be produced also called total
production. From this chart, the total production curve can be drawn below.

Total production: Engaging different types of factors, the production that can
be found called total production.

¥
60

50 +
40 b
30 |
20 |
10

012345678 *
Quantity of labour

Marginal Production

From this diagram, when the quantity of labour remains/is in 7 unit then the
production becomes the highest (60 quintal). Afler that when the quantity of 3
labour factors increases more then the total production starts diminishing.
2025

Production & Organisation 61

Average Production: We can get the average production when we divide the
amount of the total production by the total amount of factors (Labourer). (Here,
we have taken labourer as the factor. The average production can also be
calculated by other factors of production).

Total Production
Total Labour Factor

Average Production=

Marginal Production: With the change of one unit of a factor of production
(.e. labour or capital), the change that happens in the total production. is known
as the marginal production. If labour is used, we shall call it marginal production
of labour and if capital is used, it will be called marginal production of capital.
That means, using a factor or labour, the change that occurs to the total
production, ts marginal production. From the schedule that follows, it can be seen
that when the labour factor increases from 1 to 2, the total production increases
from 10 to 24 quintals. Here, the marginal production is (24-10)=14 quintals.
Thus, if the usage of the factor is increased up to 3, the total production
becomes 36 quintals. Here the marginal production is (36-24)=12 quintals.

The Relation between Average and Marginal Production: There is a
relation between the average and the marginal production in the production
system.

an

ae)

a

Average & marginal production
i

3 4 5

t
fs

The horizontal axis (OX) shows the labour and the vertical axis (OY) shows the
62 Economics

average and marginal production. In the diagram, AP is the average production

curve, and MP is the marginal production curve. We can see in the diagram that:

1. When the marginal production is more than the average production, the
average production increases, Therefore, the marginal production curve is
usually above the average production curve. In the diagram, if the usage of
Jabour factor is 2 unit then the marginal production becomes more than the
average production.

2, When marginal production decreases, average production also decreases, In
this situation, the average production curve remains above the marginal
production curve. In the picture, if the usage of labour factor is 5 unit then the
average production is more than the marginal production. But the usage of
labour factor is 3 unit then the marginal production and the average
production become equal to each other ie; 12 quintal. Since then both average
production and marginal production have been declining and marginal
production is lower than average production.

3. When the average production is at its highest, the marginal production curve
intersects the average production curve at its highest point, ie. at the highest
point of the average production, the average production and the marginal
production become equal. In the picture, at 3 unit of labour factor usage, the
average and the marginal production are equal at the point E.

4.6 Cost of Production

Nuru Mia of Rajshahi has made a lychee garden on 2 acres of land. There are
about 100 lychee trees in the garden. This year, for different types of factors, 20
thousand taka has been spent. The production of lychee was also good. Nuru Mia
and his son protect the garden from the disturbances of bats and other birds,
forgoing their sleep and comforts.

There are two types of expenses for the lychee garden. |. Costs for the factors,
i.e. financial cost of production and 2. Leaving comfort and sleep, i.e. human
sufferings. In order to measure the real cost of production, these two types
expenses have to be considered. The total of the two types of expenses is called
real cost of production.

2025
2025

Production & Organisation 63

4.7 Explicit and Implicit Cost

The sum of the visible costs that any production institution spends, for renting or
buying materials is known as explicit cost. For example, the wages and
allowances of the people working at the production institutions or farms,
expenditures for buying raw materials and intermediate goods, different kinds of
fixed costs, e.g. house rent, interest of the capital, etc.

Implicit costs stand for the value of the entrepreneur's own labour and other
costs, costs for self-employed resources, e.g. the business institution at one's
own home, establishing factory, building an office, etc. These costs are not
included in the accounts book of the farm. For example, ina self-owned farm,
ihe person counts the profit as the remuneration of his services rather than
counting a separate salary. In this case any type of allowance of the owner is
treated as the implicit cost of the farm.

4.8 Personal and Social Cost

We have got above the idea of financial cost production, real cost production and
explicit and implicit cost. Now we will learn personal and social cost.

Any farm or production institution spends financial cost and other explicit cost
directly in order to purchase different kinds of wealths or materials. The total
amount of financial cost and explicit cost is called personal cost. In brief, the
total of explicit and implicit cost of a person that is engaged in production
activities is personal cost. In order to produce or consume, different people in the
society face loss for the process of production or consumption. The total amount
of money that is needed to compensate these loss is social cost.

For example, the city dwellers use cars. The smokes of the cars hamper the
inhabitants of city physically. For this reason the society has to spend money for
health and treatment. The amount of money that is spent for health and treatment
is called social cost. Personal cost is reflected in social cost but social cost may
not be reflected in personal cost.

Though social cost is embedded in personal cost. generally it is not included in
personal cost.
64 Economics

Task: Why is it important to know the idea of explicit and implicit cost of a
production institution? Discuss it in groups and present it in the class,

Exercise

Short Questions

What is meant by production and factors?

Name some of the factors in agricultural production.

Give an idea of the organiser.

Why does the marginal production diminish?

What is the main idea of the law of diminishing marginal returns?
Give an idea of financial and real cost.

What are explicit and implicit costs? Explain the idea with examples.

ae

Descriptive Questions

Explain five processes of creating ubtlity in production.

Mlustrate the factors of production.

Mlustrate with examples how an organisation can be developed.

Explain the characteristics of a good organisation,

Explain the relationship between total, average and marginal production.
Tlustrate the law of diminishing marginal returns.

By ee be be

Multiple-Choice Questions

1. Hew many factors of production are there?

a. 2 b 4

ct. 6 d, 8

2. What type of cost is not included in the accounts book of a farm?

a. fixed cost b. total cost
c. explicit cost d. implicit cost

20125
Production & Organisation 65

¥

Margunal production.

Marginal Produciton curve (MP)

0 E Li Li La ‘a
Labour

Take a look at the diagram above and answer questions 3 and 4.

3. What is the amount of labour at the optimum point of marginal returns?
a OL b. OL1
ce. OL d. OL;

4. Frora the shape of the MP curve il can be understood that
i. production rises in an increasing manner.
ii. marginal production diminishes gradually.

ill. production rises in a diminishing manner.

Which of the following is correct?
a4 b. il

¢ iandii ad. iitand ii

Creative Questions

1. Kabir is a furniture businessman. He has a number of furniture shops at
different parts of the country. With the help of 30 emplovees, he cuts wood and
makes different types of furniture from those wood and supplies these furniture
to his shops. He employs different people for each of his shops. He participates
in the exhibitions for expanding the market for the products. The demand for his
products is rising day by day in the market.

Forma-9, Economics Class 9-10
66 Economics

a. Whatis labour?

b. What is law of diminishing marginal returns?

¢. Illustrate the process for creating utility as adopted by Kabir, in the light of
your textbook.

d. Can Kabir be called a successful organiser? Give reasons for your answer,

2. Hossain Ali produced 50 kg of rice from his land employing one labourer in
the first year. For better production, in the following years, he employed more
labourers. The production that he gets is shown in the table below—

Number of Total production of | The production cost Marginal
labourers rice (20 tk per kg) of rice (taka) production
1 50 1000 1000
2 100 = -
3 130 :
4 150 - -

a. What is total production?
b. What do you understand by personal cost?
¢, Fill in the table above and illustrate its main idea.

d. The presented matter in the table is also applicable to the agriculture of
Bangladesh. Give your opimon.

2025
