2025

Chapter Three
Force

Neon net

Weight lifting by South Asian Games gold medal winner
Mabia Akhter Simanta

We discussed the motion of objects in earlier chapters but the reason behind
motion was not discussed. In this chapter we will see that motion is created due
to force and will also discuss about three devises laws of Isaac Newton regarding
force. At the time of discussion of how force acts on a body, very naturally topics
like different types of force, inertia of body, nature of force, frictional force etc
come into the discussion.
62

Physics

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

explain the inertia of object and the qualitative concept of force by
applying Newton’s first law of motion.

explain the nature of fundamental forces.

explain the influence of balanced and unbalanced forces.

analyse the influence of force on the motion of an object.

measure the force by applying Newton’s second law of motion.
explain the action and reaction force by Newton’s third law of motion.
analyse the influence of motion and force on safe travelling.

explain the conservation laws of momentum and collision.

explain different types of frictions and frictional forces.

analyse the influence of friction on the motion of an object.

describe the means to increase or decrease friction.

explain the positive impact of friction in our daily lives.

2025
2025

Force 63

3.1 Inertia and Concept of Force- Newton’s First law of motion

In the previous chapter we have learned about velocity, speed, acceleration (and
deceleration), elapsed distance and their mutual relationships. We have deduced
the equations of motion and applied them to solve problems related to motion as
well. In this chapter we will learn how motion can be created or motion can be
influenced by applying force. We may begin with Newton’s First law.

( Newton’s First law of motion: Newton’s first law of motion can be \
expressed as-

A stationary object will remain stationary and an object in uniform motion
will continue its uniform motion unless a force is applied to it. (Since
velocity is a vector quantity, for uniform motion the object will not change
its direction of motion; it will move along a straight line at uniform speed.)

\ y,

The first part of Newton’s first law is not difficult to understand because we
always observe that the bodies at rest remain at rest and do not move until they
are pushed. The problem arises from the second part, because we never observe that
a body in motion keeps its perpetual motion for ever. If motion is produced in a
body by pushing it, we observe that the body comes to rest if no force is applied.
From our daily life experiences it seems that to keep a body in uniform motion
we have to apply force on it continuously. Form Newton’s first law we learnt
that it is not true. If a body in uniform velocity stops then we have to realize that
force has been applied by some means. Friction, air resistance etc. actually stops
a moving body by applying force in the opposite direction. If all these forces
could be withdrawn, then we would find that a body in uniform motion keeps its
perpetual motion for ever.

3.1.1 Inertia

The characteristic that a stationary body wants to be stationary or a body in
motion wants to keep its motion, unless a force is applied, is called inertia. When
a car at rest suddenly starts moving we move backwards, this is an example of
inertia. The lower part of the body is attached to the car. When the car starts
moving, the lower part of the body moves with the car but the upper part of the
body is still stationary and tends to remain stationary. So the upper part of the
64 Physics

body move backwards. Since this inertia is due to the tendency of rest, this is
called inertia of rest.

When people get down from moving bus, train etc we see they fall downdue to
the inertia of motion. The whole body of the person in a moving train or bus is
in motion. When his or her leg touches the ground, the lower part of his/her
body comes to rest, the upper part of the body keeps moving forward due to the
inertia of motion. So the person falls down.

@) Do Yourself

Keep a card on a glass. Place a metal coin on the card and flip the card and
displace it. The coin will fall into the glass.

You definitely observed it that the object with higher mass cannot be displaced
by higher amount by the application of an equal amount of force. But a body
with less mass can be displaced easily. Or otherwise we can say, if the mass is
increased then inertia is increased as well.

Example

Question: The two graphs illustrate the values of position and velocity with time
in figure 3.01, explain where and for what period force was applied?

Answer: Both the graphs are identical to look, but they contain totally different
information.

(i) In the first graph, from 0 to ¢, or from ¢, to the end, there is no change in
position in these two time intervals, this means there is no velocity, therefore
there is no question of change of velocity. This means definitely no force is
acting in these two time intervals. From time f, to ¢,, there is a change in position,
but the change is at the same rate (since the line is a straight line), that means the

2025
Force 65

SPA v(m/s)
>_>

t(s) t(s)

(m/s)

© vim /s.

>_>

t(s) t(s)

re ay v(m/s)

t(s) t(s)

Figure 3.01 : Position-Time and Velocity- Time graph

object is moving with a uniform velocity. Therefore, there is no change in
velocity. Therefore, from time ¢, to ¢, no force is applied on the body. At the
instant ¢,, a force is applied on the stationary object to make it move with a
uniform velocity. Again just at the instant ¢,, by applying a force the motion is
stopped. No force is applied elsewhere.

Therefore, when 0<t<t,,t,<t<t,and t, <¢ there is no force.

Only when, ¢ = t, and t= t, force is applied for a moment.
(ii) In the second graph, the object is in uniform motion; from 0 to ¢, and from
t, to the end, therefore no force is applied on the body during these time

intervals. From time f, to ¢,, the velocity is changing at a uniform rate, therefore, definitely
a force is applied on it.

Therefore, when 0 <t<t, and t2 <t, there is no force.
When, t; <t <t, force is applied.

Forma-9, Physics, Class 9-10
66 Physics
3.1.2 Force

Actually Newton’s first law of motion can be the definition of force. Force is
that quantity the application of which a stationary object start move and a body
moving, with a uniform velocity change its velocity. From Newton’s first law we
can understand, what is force but cannot measure it. But from the second law, we
will learn to measure force.

When you use force in your daily life for different purposes, you may realize that
for the application of some forces it is necessary to come in contact with the
object (e.g. to lift heavy objects with the help of a crane, to push anything or
coming to rest of moving objects due to friction). Whereas you may have noticed
that for the application of some other forces, it is not necessary to come into
contact with the object (falling of anything downwards due to gravitational
force, attraction by magnets).

3.2 Nature of Fundamental Forces

If you are asked how many types of forces are there on the earth? You certainly
will say, many types. If we push anything this is a force, when a truck carries or
pulls a load this is a force, when a tree is uprooted due to a storm this is a force,
when a magnet attracts iron this is a force, when houses are blown away in bomb
blasts, it is a type of force, it is a force, when a crane lifts something this is force.
If you are given some time, you can prepare a big list of such types of forces.

But do you know the amazing matter? There are only four types of forces in
nature, if the forces described above are analyzed, you will find that they are not
outside these four types. Fundamental forces are actually only four in number.
These are; gravitational force, electromagnetic force, weak nuclear force and
strong nuclear force.

3.2.1 Gravitational Force

All objects in the universe attract one another by a force due to their mass. This
force is called the gravitational force. Due to this gravitational force the stars are
revolving within the galaxy or the earth is revolving around the sun and the
moon is revolving around the earth. When the force of gravitation of the earth
works on us, we call it gravity. This gravity attracts us towards the center of the
earth i.e. pulls downwards and due to this pull we feel our weight.

2025
2025

Force 67

Force of gravitation is an amazing force of physics. An object that has mass
attracts another object by the gravitational force. In this chapter, we shall discuss
the gravitational force a little bit more in detail.

3.2.2 Electromagnetic Force

We have seen, now and then, that when we comb our hair with a comb it attracts
pieces of papers. We have also seen that a magnet attracts or repulses another
magnet. Though we think that electric and magnetic forces are different in
nature, actually the two forces are identical. They only appear in two forms.
Only and this electromagnetic force can attract and repulse but the other forces
can attract only, cannot repulse. It is so much stronger than gravitational force
(10* times, or trillion trillion trillion times stronger). That the statement is true,
you can definitely guess. Because when you comb your hair by a comb and pull
a piece of paper by attraction, the whole earth tries to pull the piece of paper
by the gravitational force due to its total mass. But the small amount of
electricity in your comb defeats the total gravitational pull of the giant earth.

3.2.3 Weak Nuclear Force or Weak Force

It is called weak because it is weaker than the electromagnetic force
(approximately trillion times weaker) but not at all weak like the gravitational
force. The force of gravitation and the electromagnetic force can act from any
distance but this force acts for very small distance (10°? m). The emission of beta
(B) rays or electrons from a radioactive nucleus is due to this weak nuclear force.

3.2.4 Strong Nuclear Force

This is the strongest force of the universe; this is hundred times stronger than the
electromagnetic force but this too acts at a very small distance (10° m).

We know the nucleus is situated at the centre of the atom and the strong force
acting between the protons and the neutrons within the nucleus confines them.
Confined due to this strong nuclear force, the nucleus contains an enormous
amount of energy. Therefore by the division of a large nucleus or by the addition
68 Physics

of small nucleuses a huge amount of energy can be produced due to this force.
For this reason a nuclear bomb has so much energy. By this force light and heat
is produced in the sun.

According to scientists these four types of forces have the same origin and they are
trying to explain all these forces by a single law. Meanwhile, it has become
possible to explain the electromagnetic force and the weak nuclear force by a
single law. This is a tremendous success of theoretical physics. (Therefore, you
can say, forces are of three types: gravitation, electro-weak and nuclear force.
Nobody will say it is wrong). The scientists are trying to unify the other forces
too by a single law.

3.3 Balanced and Unbalanced Forces

Force is a vector quantity; therefore, if a force is applied on an object then it is
possible to cancel that force by the application of another force from opposite
direction. Then we say that the forces are balanced. When two or more forces are
applied on an object and if the combined resultant force of the forces becomes
zero then the body has no acceleration.

In figure 3.02 it is shown that an object is suspended with a thread. The force of
attraction (i.e. weight of the object) of the earth on the object is acting vertically
downwards. Again another force i.e. the tension of the thread is acting vertically
upwards. Here two forces are acting in opposite direction thus canceling each
other’s action and producing a balanced condition.

Now if the thread is cut then the tension of the thread T will not work on the
object. Only the force of gravity of the earth or weight will be acting downwards.
Here, the force of gravity or weight of the body is the unbalanced force. Owing
to this unbalanced force, the object will fall down with the acceleration due to

gravity.

2025
2025

Force

We can apply an unbalanced
force on the object without cutting
the thread too. If by pulling the
object we displace it slightly
along one side, then the tension
of the thread and the weight will
not work in the opposite
direction. Then the two forces
ie. tension of the thread and
weight of the body will combine
and produce a resultant force.
When the object is just released,

69

to
1, =

wW
Figure 3.02: The force is balanced in the first
figure. In second figure, as soon as the pendulum
is released; a resultant force will act, so the
pendulum will start movement.

this resultant force will start working on the object and the body will oscillate.
This is another example of the unbalanced force.

Three forces together can produce the balanced condition too. If a heavy book is
tied by a rope and pulled by the two terminals of the rope from two sides, it is
possible to suspend the book in a stationary state (Figure 3.03). Since the book
is in the stationary state, consequently here the weight of the book W and the two
tensions of the rope T, and T, combine to produce a zero resultant force.

Figure 3.03: No matter how strongly you pull the two ends of the rope, you
can never make it completely straight, because then the weight of the book

cannot be neutralized.
70 Physics

@) Do yourself

Tie a heavy book by a rope and try to make it completely straight by
pulling it from the two ends. No matter how much force you apply from
both ends of the rope, you can never make it completely straight. Because
if the rope becomes completely straight then the resultant force cannot be
made zero by neutralizing the weight W of the book.

3.4 Momentum

Let a truck and a bicycle hit a small car with the same velocity. In this collision
which one will damage the small car more the cycle or truck? Definitely the
truck, because the truck is much heavier than the cycle. Though the
velocity of the cycle and the truck are the same, but the momentum of the truck
is much more than that of the cycle since the truck has greater mass. Simply, the
momentum is defined as the product of the mass and the velocity. If the mass of
an object is m and its velocity is v then the momentum p can be expressed as:
p=mv

Here the mass is a scalar quantity, but the velocity is a vector, therefore the
momentum is a vector quantity. You may think that generally the mass of an
object does not change, so a change in momentum may occur only due to the
change in its velocity. But in a special case we may find that the velocity of the
object has not changed but due to the change of mass, change of its momentum
occurs. You may think, instead of defining a new term ‘momentum’, what was
the problem to always treat it as a product of mass and velocity? In general, it
does not create a big problem but in case of a ‘particle of light’ it may create
serious problems. A particle of light or a photon has no mass but it has
momentum! Compared to the mass and velocity momentum is a more
fundamental quantity.

Unit of momentum is kg m/s
Dimension of momentum is, [p] = MLT?

If more than one object are in motion and they are moving at different velocities,

2025
2025

Force 71

then they have a combined momentum. Due to different velocities of the objects,
they may collide with one another in their path of motion and due to the
collisions their velocities may change. If no force is applied from outside, then
after the collision the combined momentum will not change. This statement
is defined as the law of conservation of momentum.

Example

Question: If you throw a tennis ball at a wall with a velocity of 10 m/s, it will
bounce back towards you with the same speed. If the mass of the ball is 100 gm,
what is the change of momentum?

Answer: when the ball is thrown, then the momentum is p = mv. After striking
the wall, when the ball bounces back, its momentum becomes p’ = -mv.
Therefore the change of momentum:

p-p' = mv-(-myv) = 2mv
For this change of momentum, the wall exerts a force on the tennis ball for a
very short time. In cricket, the batsman hits the ball by the bat for a very short
interval of time and the change of its momentum occurs. We call these six’s or a

boundary.

3.5 Collision

3.5.1 Conservation of Momentum and Energy

Let us consider that two objects of masses m, and m, are moving along a straight
line on a plane. Due to the difference of their velocities they collide and hence
their velocities are changed. Now, v, and v, are the new velocities of masses m,
and m, respectively (figure 3.04). Can we find the values of v, and v, after the
collision?

The combined momentum of the two objects before collision = m,u,+m,u,
The combined momentum of the two objects after collision = m,v,tm,v,

Since, no force is applied from outside, hence the momentum before collision
and after collision will be the same. This is the law of conservation of
momentum. Therefore we can write,
72

MU, + MzUz = Mm, v, + M22

Here we have only one equation and two
unknown quantities v, and v,, therefore we
cannot calculate the values of v, and v,. We
need another equation to determine the
values of v, and v,. Fortunately, we have
another equation too. In the next chapter,
when we will learn about energy, we will
get the second equation from the law of
conservation of energy. This phenomenon
is the law of conservation of energy. In the
next chapter you will find that the kinetic
energy of an object can be expressed as
$ mu’, where m is the mass and wu is the
velocity of the object. We assume that no
other energy is exchanged here rather than
kinetic energy.

—P un

Physics

—) ur
"Co-

Pi

‘©

—p> Vi

@

Figure 3.04: After collision, v, and
v, are the new velocities of masses

m, and m, respectively

Therefore using the law of conservation of energy, we can write,

1
2

@) Do Yourself

2 2

2 2 2 1 2
Zz mMyUyz + ZM2UuUn =ZTM,V,z + Zz M2zV2

2

v, and v,. These are:

(Using these two equations calculate the values of v, and v,.
We can write the law of conservation of momentum as:

m, (uz — V2) = m2(v2 — U2)
The law of conservation of energy, we can be expressed as
m, (uj — vf) = m,(vZ — uz)

Now using these two equations we can calculate the values of the velocities

(m, — mz)u, + 2mzuz

Vyz4=

mM, +m;

(mz — m,)uz + 2myu,

V2 =

\ mM, +m,

~\

2025
Force 73

From the expressions of v, and v, we see that if the masses m, and m, are equal
i.e. m, =m, then the two objects will exchange their velocities.
Then, v,=u, andv,=u,

@) Do Yourself

Right now you can do this experiment. Knock a stationary marble with anoth-
er marble of the same mass so that it collides with the stationary marble.
You will observe that the knocking marble will become stationary and the
stationary marble will move with the same velocity as of the knocking
marble.

Finding the velocities of two objects after collision and using that concept we
will be able to explain the incidents of road accidents easily.

3.5.2 Safe Journey: velocity and Motion

In the next chapter we will be able to understand kinetic energy in detail when
we will learn about energy. But already we know that the kinetic energy can be
expressed by mu? while reading about collisions. The topic is very important
for discussion regarding travelling. The term kinetic energy contains the square
of the velocity, this means if the velocity is doubled then energy will increase by
four times. When two cars in an accident collide, then due to this energy both
cars are damaged and the passengers are injured. Therefore to minimize the loss
in an accident, the easiest way is to keep the speed low. In our country, most of
the accidents occur due to the speeding of cars. Then it becomes difficult to
control the cars and a huge amount of energy is used up when the accident
occurs.

Let us consider that a head-on collision occurred between a heavy truck (m,)
loaded with stone and a small car (m,) coming with the same velocity. Which
one will be damaged more?

Since a head-on collision occurred, so velocity of the small car is opposite to that
of the truck.

Therefore, if u is the velocity of the truck then the velocity of the car is —u. Since,
the mass of the small car m, is far less than the mass m, of the truck, so if m, is
regarded as zero, the error is not too large and our calculations become easier. (If
you desire, you can calculate this by taking the mass of real bus-truck and small

Forma-10, Physics, Class 9-10
74 Physics

car). Taking m, as zero, after collision, velocity of the truck and the small car is
(m, —0)u+2x0x (—u)
=u
m4, +0

Vy =
And
(0 — m,)(—u) + 2m,u

= = 3u

Mm, + mz

V2

The result is terrible. After the collision, the truck will move with the same
velocity, ic. it will not experience the horrible nature of the collision. The
velocity of the small car will be changed from —u to 3u, that means change of
velocity is 3u- (-u)= 4u, the direction of the velocity of small car will be changed
and it will fly off with four times its velocity in the reverse direction. In this
process the small car will be crumpled and destroyed. The loss of lives of the
passengers will be a very natural consequence. Again, we assume that no other

energy is exchanged here rather than kinetic energy, which is not true.

Therefore, on the roads we have to drive heavy trucks and heavy buses very
carefully, because in an accident even though these are not damaged too much,
but the small cars are damaged much more in a head-on collision with them.

@) Do Yourself

Figure 3.05: Experiment of conservation of momentum and energy
Place two adjacent books parallely and put four or five marbles in the
gaps so that all the marbles are touching one another (Figure 3.05).
Hit the row of marbles by knocking with a marble. You will see that if you
strike with one marble on one side, one marble will come out from the other
side; two marbles will come out if the strike is done with two marbles. You
will never be able to bring out two marbles striking with one marble or
\ bring out one marble striking with two marbles. SS)

2025
2025

Force 75

3.6 Effect of Force on Motion: Newton’s Second Law

In the football ground we always see a player kicking a stationary football and
directing it to distant places by creating motion. At the time of the kick, when the
player touches the ball, only at that instant, force is applied on the ball. The
stationary ball goes into motion due to this force.

We can apply force also for a long time instead of just for a moment. By pushing
a stationary go-cart for a long time and we can release it after setting it into
motion. It can move for a while until it ceases its motion due to friction.

The direction of velocity can also be changed by the application of force. When
a bowler throws a cricket ball towards the batsman, then the batsman can direct
the ball totally in a different direction by hitting the ball with his bat.

In the three examples given above, we see that velocity is changed by the
application of force on an object for a short or a long time. In the previous
chapter we have seen that the rate of change of velocity is acceleration.
Therefore we can say, when force is applied on an object, acceleration is
produced. The relation between the force applied on a body and the acceleration
is Newton’s second law.

Newton’s second law: The rate of change of momentum of a body is
proportional to the applied force acting on it and the change of
momentum also takes place in the direction in which the force acts.

If a body is moving with an initial velocity u and the velocity is changed (by
increasing or decreasing) from u to v after a time t.

The change of momentum:
mv-mu

So, the rate of change of momentum:
mv —mu (v—u)
= m =
t
Since, we considered that there is no change of mass, so we can write like this.
Further we know that acceleration is:
v-u
. . . t .

Therefore if the applied force is F, then we can write Newton’s second law of
motion as:

a=
76 Physics

max F

But we don’t want to express the law in proportional form, rather we want to
write it as an equation.

In that case, using a proportionality constant k, we can write

F = kma

In case of Newton’s second law it is possible to create an amazing result. Since
the term ‘force’ is not explained anywhere, (Newton’s first law gives the concept
only) by using the second law this will be measured for the first time. So, we
have to give a value for the constant. We can say, when Newton’s second law
will be applied, if the proportionality constant is considered as 1, then the
equation we will get is the measure of force. How easily a proportionality
relation is converted into an equation.

Therefore, we can write Newton’s second law of motion as an equation. If the
force is F and the proportionality constant is considered as 1, then

That this small and simple equation can make a revolutionary change in the
world of physics is difficult to believe.

Unit of force is Newton (4).
Dimension of force is [F] = MLT~?

We should remember that Newton’s second law of motion is true not only for
linear motion, but this is true for any type of motion. We have known about grav-
itational force, by using Newton’s second law, we will be able to explain the
motion of the planets revolving around the sun due to the gravitational force. But

in this book, we will limit the use of Newton’s second law only to linear motion.

If force is applied on an object, then by using Newton’s second law, its
acceleration can easily be determined. (If force is divided by mass, acceleration
can be found). If acceleration is known, the velocity or distance travelled
can be determined by using the laws of motion.

2025
2025

Force 77

Otherwise we can say that if we see an object in motion and can calculate its
acceleration, then if its mass is known, it is possible to calculate the force acting
on it.

Now we look at some examples.

Example

Question: A force of 100 N is applied on a stationary body of mass 5 kg for 10
s. (a) what will be the acceleration due to this force? (b) What is the velocity
after 10 s? (c) What is the velocity after 20 s? (d) What is distance travelled in
20 s? (e) show velocity and distance travelled by drawing a graph.

Answer: (a) acceleration,

_F _100N _., 2
an 5kg = 20 m/s

(b) velocity after 10 s,
v=utat =0+4 20 X10m/s = 200 m/s

(c) force is applied up to 10 s, since force is applied no more, therefore, after
reaching the velocity of 200 m/s, its velocity will be unchanged. That is,
velocity after 20 s is 200 m/s.

(d) distance travelled in 20 s has to be determined in two steps. Distance
travelled in the first 10 s,

Ss, = ut + Sat? =5* 20 x 102m= 1000m

Distance travelled in the second 10 s,
Sz = vt = 200 Xx 10m= 2000m
Total distance travelled,

S =S,+ sz = 1000m+ 2000m = 3000m=3km

(e) Shown in figure 3.06.
78 Physics

i]

S
ni
hat
i

n

é
8

n

Velocity (m/s)

Distance (km)

0 5 0 6 2 0 5 10 15 20
time (s) time (s)

Figure 3.06 : Velocity-Time and Distance-Time graph

Question: A force of 20 N is applied on a stationary object for 10 s and the
object covered a distance of 100 m. What is the mass of the object?

. 1
Answer: s=ut+5at?
Here, u=0
2s 2x100__, ;

a=a= T02 m/s* =2m/s

Again, * =ma
ar 10k
mea 22 8

3.7 Gravitational Force

We have talked about force (which creates acceleration), how it is measured has
been discussed (product of mass and acceleration). But until now you have not
been introduced to a real force. In physics, an amazing force is the gravitational
force; a body having mass attracts another body by the gravitational force. Let
us consider two masses m, and m, and the distance between them is r. Then if the

2025
2025

Force 719

force ( Figure 3.07) acting between them is F, then

mm
F=G 1 ite

r2
Here, G is the gravitational constant and its value is:

6.67 X 10-11 Nm*kg

We have to remember that the mass m, attracts mass m, towards itself by the
force F; also the mass m, attracts mass m, towards itself.

Of the two masses, if one is our earth

and we consider that the mass of the r

earth is M and we let another body of m, m,
mass m be kept over the earth’s surface,
then, the earth will attract the mass m
towards its centre by a force F.

Figure 3.07: Gravitational
force between two masses

This force is actually the weight of the object. Here, R is the distance of the
object of mass m from the centre of the earth. This is not the distance of mass m
from the earth’s surface. Since the earth radius is too large (approximately 6370
km), therefore the small distances over the earth surface are not considered. The
distance is measured from the centre of the earth because for a spherical body if
it is considered that all its mass is centered at the centre, then no error occurs.
(Because each point of the earth attracts the mass m towards itself and if all the
attractions are assembled, it seems that the total mass is concentrated at the
centre of the earth!)

The mass m experiences acceleration due to the force of gravitation of the earth.
Already we have said that the acceleration due to gravity is expressed by g instead
of a.

Therefore instead of F = ma we can write,

mM
Ope = m9
M
or, g9=GR

Now, the mass of the earth, Mf = 5.98x10** kg, radius of the earth, R = 6.37x10° m,
80 Physics
therefore,

_GM _ 6.67 x 10-1 x 5.98 x 1074
9 "R2 = (6.37 x 108)2

In the previous chapter, we used this value of g in the equations of motion. Now
you understand why this value of g was used.

m/s? = 9.8 m/s?

Example

Question: The height of the space
station from the earth’s surface is
approximately 100 km. What is the
value of g there?

Answer: In the space station, if the
acceleration due to gravity is g', then

_ GM
~R+r2

Here, radius of the earth R=6370 km,
and height of the space station,

t

g

Figure 3.08: the floating astronaut in
a space shuttle

r= 100km
,_ GM | GM _ g
I(r? R20 +r/R (1 +r/R)
ro g _— 2
g = Torez = 2:49 m/s

The value of g' is not zero at all, but why does the astronaut feel weightless (Figure
3.08) there?

If the value of the gravitational acceleration g is known, for any mass m we can
calculate the value of gravitational force very easily. This is,
mM GM

B= Gpr = ™ pr = mg

2025
Force 81

Using Newton's second law of motion is quite simple. For each mass, Newton's
second law should be applied in every direction, with the vector sum of forces on
the left side of the equation and the mass multiplied by acceleration on the right
side. Since force and acceleration are vector quantities, both the magnitude and
the direction must be considered. According to the conventions, the quantities
pointing to the right are considered positive, while those pointing to the left are
regarded as negative. Similarly, the quantities directed upwards are treated as
positive, whereas those directed downwards are treated as negative.

m

Here, the tension Ton the string acts to the right on
the mass. It is important to note that there is only
one tension force acting in a string, and this tension
always acts along the string and away from the
object. In this case, both the tensionTand the accel-
eration of the mass m are directed to the right and
therefore

T=ma Figure 3.09: Weight ofan

Along the vertical direction, the mass mmm is acted object is applying force on
upon by the downward gravitational force mg and the another object.
upward normal force N. Since the resultant of these two forces is zero, there is
no acceleration of the mass m in the vertical direction.

Two forces are acting on the second mass: the gravitational force Mg acting
downward and the tension force T (the same tension T acting on each part of the
same string) acting upward. Since the tension force acts along the string and
away from the object, we can apply Newton's second law to find:
T-Mg = M (-a)

Here, a negative sign is placed before the acceleration because the acceleration
of the mass M is directed downward, and since both objects are connected by the
string, the magnitude of the acceleration of mass M is also a. By solving the two
equations above, we find that a=Mg/(M+m)

Using this acceleration we can explain the motion of the object located on the
table.

Example

Question: As shown in figure 3.10, two weights of masses 10 kg and 5 kg are
suspended from two sides of a mass m using two pulleys. What is the force
acting on the mass m?

Forma-11, Physics, Class 9-10
82 Physics

Tz Ti
a <— —

Tz

10 gva 15g

Figure 3.10: Force is acting on a mass by two
Answer: weights from two sides using pulley.

Here, three objects are connected by two strings, resulting in the same
acceleration for all of them. The 10 kg mass will move downward, and the mass
m will move to the left, and the 5 kg mass will move upward. Let's denote the
acceleration as a.Two tension forces will act along the two strings: T_1
(connected to the 5 kg mass) and T_2 (connected to the 10 kg mass).

By applying Newton's laws of motion in the vertical direction for the 5 kg mass,
we get:

T1-5g=Sa

For the 5 kg mass, T_1 acts upward. Using Newton's second law horizontally for
the mass m, we obtain:

-T2+T 1=m(-a)

Here, the force T_2 acts to the left, the force T_1 acts to the right, and the
acceleration of the mass mis directed to the left.

The mass mexperiences a downward gravitational forcemg and an upward
normal force N in the vertical direction, Because the resultant of the two forces
is zero, the mass m does not accelerate in the vertical direction. Now, applying
Newton's laws of motion vertically to the 10 kg mass, we find:

T2-10g=10(-a).

For the 10 kg mass, T_2 acts upward.

By solving the three equations above, we find that the combined acceleration of
the objects is given bya=5g/(10+5+m) and the total force acting on the mass is
given by-T2+TI=-5g+15a. However, it is not possible to determine the value of
acceleration without knowing the mass m.

2025
2025

Force 83

@) Do Yourself

(— Rubber Band Spring Balance \
A spring balance is used to measure the weight of small objects. It is less
likely that all of you have a spring balance. So, to serve the purpose you
can make a spring balance with the help of a rubber band. You can use the
plastic lid of a container as a pan to keep a weight. Make four equidistant
holes round the pan and tie with a string. Now hang the pan from one end of
a rubber band. Attach the other end of the rubber band to a board with the
help of a paper clip. Now hang the board in a suitable place.

Figure 3.11: A spring balance made of a rubber band

Put a black dot on the string from which you have hanged the pan with the
rubber band. When there is no weight on the pan, put a black spot on the
board where the black spot of the string remains. This point indicates zero
mass. Now put five coins of five taka in the pan. Since mass of each coin is
8 gm, hence total mass will be 40 gm. Then put another black mark on the
board where the black spot of the string stays. This indicates mass of 40 gm.
Now draw a line from 0 gm to 40 gm marking points and divide the line into
four equal parts. Each division equals 10 gm mass. Now increase the length
of the line and calibrate it to measure more mass. Divide the line
accordingly, as much accurately as you want to measure the mass.

Now your rubber band balance is ready, now with this balance you will be

able to measure the mass of small objects around you. If you have an actual

Ne yy

84 Physics

spring balance with you, you can measure the mass more accurately and you
can measure the weight from there.

Serial | Name of |Mass of object obtained | Mass of object in kg | weight of the object
Number|the object |from balance in gram, mM = m/1000 kg W =mg N
NN SS
3.8 Newton’s Third Law

We have learnt from Newton’s first law what happens when no force is applied.
We have learnt from Newton’s second law what happens when a force is applied.
We will learn from Newton’s third law what type of reaction takes place between
the two objects when an object applies force on another object.

Newton’s Third Law: When an object applies a force on another object,
then that object also applies a force of equal magnitude on the first object
but in the opposite direction.

In physics, generally Newton’s third law is written as, “Every action has an equal
and opposite reaction”, although we have not written it in this form. By this time
since we have a little idea about force, confusion may occur if force is termed as
“action” or “reaction” “suddenly”. Moreover, those who are the new learners of
physics, their first question will be if every reaction (a force) has an opposite
reaction (another force) then why action and reaction are not cancelling each
other, producing zero? For this reason, the third law will have to be written very
precisely. The third law states that if there are two objects A and B, then when A
exerts a force on B, then B also exerts a force on A. It is worth mentioning that
two opposite forces act on different objects, never on a single object. If the two
forces were applied on a single object, only then one could cancel the other. Here
there is no scope of cancellation.

2025
2025

Force 85

The matter will be clarified with the help of some examples. Let us consider that
amass m is allowed to fall from a certain height (figure 3.12). We know that due
to the earth’s gravitational force, the mass m experiences a force F towards the
centre of the earth:

Already we have seen that this force can be expresed as mg.

From Newton’s third law we know that the
mass m also attracts the giant earth towards
a itself. That force is also F, but in the
opposite direction. We do not bother about
w this force, the reason is that the acceleration
a of the earth due to this force can be
determined:
F=Ma
Here, M is the mass of the earth and a is the
acceleration,

Therefore, gq = - = id = (-) g

If the mass of the earth is M= 5.98 x 10” kg,
then if an object of mass 1 kg is released
Figure 3.12: As the earth attracts a from above then the acceleration of the

mass, the mass also attracts the earth will be,
earth in the same manner a = 1.6 x 10-24 m/s?

86 Physics

This is so negligible that nobody is bothered about it! Next time when you jump
anywhere, remember that you attract the whole earth towards you when you fall
downwards. (As small as the acceleration of the earth may be, you pulled the
whole earth towards you, you may be little proud of it!)

The easiest way of understanding Newton’s third law is to understand the
mechanism of our walking. We can all walk but nobody knows the physics
hidden behind this. Since you have started to learn physics a simple question can
be put to you. Since you have walked
from a stationary position, so you have

an acceleration, that means force has
been applied on you. But all of us know

that nobody is applying a force on us.

We walk by ourselves. How is that
possible?

Unless we know Newton’s third law, we
never can explain the mechanism of
walking. When we walk, we exert a force

on the ground (i.e. apply force). Then
according to the Newton’s third law the —
ground also applies an equal and
opposite force on our body (Figure
3.13). This equal and opposite force Figure 3.13: During walking when
creates the acceleration and we walk. a person applies force on the
The persons who have a little problem —- 2" then the ground also applies
understanding this, they may be remind- force on him in contrary

ed that it is easier walking on hard

ground compared to sandy ground. The reason is that it is not possible to apply
force on the sand, sand is displaced. Therefore the reaction force in Newton’s
third law cannot be achieved properly. The matter can be clarified more, if one
is allowed to walk on a very smooth surface lubricated with soap-water or oil!
There friction is hardly present so we cannot apply a backward force at all and
due to this we will not get any force on us as the reaction force. So we cannot
walk at all (You may try if you don’t believe it). If force is applied, equal and
opposite force is found, but if we cannot apply force at all, how can we get a
reaction force? Then how can we walk?

2025
2025

Force 87

L
¢’) Example

Question: Suppose you are standing on a totally frictionless surface. Your mass
is 50 kg and there is a stone of mass 100 kg in front of you. You have decided
to push the stone with a force of 50 N and will move it from one end to the
other end. What will be the velocity of the stone after 10 s? (Figure 3.14)

Figure 3.14 : When a person pushes a stone, the stone also
pushes the person in return.

Answer: When you push the stone with a force of 50 N, then according to
Newton’s third law the stone will push you also with a force of 50 N. The
acceleration of the stone will take place to the right.

aa = m/s* = 0.5 m/s?
m 100 :
Your acceleration will be exactly towards left,
50
=—_— = 2 = 2
a mm 50 m/s 1m/s

Therefore the stone and you will move in different directions. By pushing the
stone you cannot move it from one end to the other. Because a distance will be
created between you and the stone. So it is not possible to push the stone nonstop
for 10 s. But after the stone starts its movement, it will reach the other end
moving by itself on the frictionless surface. You will also reach the opposite end
but at an earlier time.
88 Physics

(a) Let us consider you pushed the stone for 2 s, what happens then?
Answer: In 2 s the velocity of the stone will be increased to:

veutat=0+05x2m/s =1m/s

Then the stone will move with a uniform velocity of 1 m/s.
In 2 s your velocity will be:

utat=0+1x2m/s =2m/s
Then you will move in the reverse direction with a uniform velocity of 2 m/s.

3.9 Frictional force

Earlier we have discussed gravitational force or gravity and spring force. Now
we shall discuss about a totally different type of force, this is frictional force.

Let us consider a wooden piece on
a table and we are trying to create
an acceleration by applying a
force on it. As shown in figure
3.15, we are applying a force F on
the mass from left to right. It will
be seen that due to friction
between the wooden piece and the
table, a frictional force f is
developed on the wooden piece
and this is lowering the applied Figure 3.15: If a force is applied on a mass
force acting from right to left. then another force may develop in the
reverse direction due to friction.

If you think that due to friction a frictional force is developed from right to left,
so if I apply a force on the wooden piece from the left too, then since the applied
force and the frictional force are in the same direction, I will get an extra force!
But it will be seen that the frictional force is still working in the opposite

2025
Force 89

direction. The frictional force always works in the direction reverse to that the
applied force! If some weight is put on the wooden piece it will be seen that the
frictional force is increased also, though the weight and the force of friction are
normal to each other.

We will see that there is nothing
surprising in it if we understand
how frictional forces are developed.
Though apparently wood, table etc.
(or the two surfaces where friction is
present) seem very smooth, but if we
view them with a microscope it will
be seen (Figure 3.16) that all
surfaces are rough or irregular.
These rough parts touch one another
or the grooves of the two surfaces in
contact catch onto one another. The
motion is obstructed due to this and we say frictional force is developed in the
opposite direction. If the two surfaces are pressed more, then the scratched
surfaces make better contact with one another, the grooves of one surface will
penetrate into the other’s grooves more deeply and as a result the frictional force
will be increased.

Figure 3.16: Actually friction creats due to
two scratched surface.

Due to friction heat is generated. It is a problem in most cases. When a piston in
a cylinder moves back and forth in a car, due to friction heat is generated there
and to control this heat, the engine of the car needs to be cooled.

3.9.1 Types of Friction

Friction is divided into three types. These are, static friction, kinetic friction,
and rolling friction.

Static friction: The frictional force that develops when two objects are at rest
relative to each other is called static friction. Due to static friction we can walk,

our legs or shoe soles rub against the ground and we don’t slip.

kinetic friction: The frictional force that is create when an object is in motion
relative to another object is called kinetic friction. When anyone grips the brake

Forma-12, Physics, Class 9-10
90 Physics

of a cycle, it presses the wheel and ceases the motion of the rotating wheel due
to kinetic friction. The kinetic friction depends on the weight of the moving
body, the more the weight, the more the kinetic friction. If an object has a mass
M, then its weight W= Mg is a force. Then the kinetic friction can be written as,
f= BW, wis the coefficient of kinetic friction.

Rolling friction: When an object moves by rolling or revolving on a surface
then the friction that develops is called the rolling friction. Among all the
frictional forces, this is the least, so we attach wheels on all kind of vehicles. It
is very easy to pull suitcases attached with wheels, if suitcases have no
wheels, it would become very difficult for us to pull it on the floor.

ii

Figure 3.17: Uses of Parachute, Apollo 15
is landing in the sea

@) Do Yourself

Release a paper from a certain height and guess the time required by the
paper to reach the ground. Now shape the paper into a small ball and then
release it. What is the time required now to reach the ground? why?

2025
Force 91

@) Do Yourself

Figure 3.18: Measurement of kinetic friction

Static friction and kinetic friction
Take several empty match boxes. Fill up the boxes with soil to make
them slightly heavier. Now put a match box on a book and keep sliding
the book gradually (Figure 3 .18). Due to the static friction the match will
not slide at first. When the book becomes sufficiently inclined, then
along the slope a force works. At the instant when this force equals the
sliding frictional force, then the match box will start sliding. You will see
that only for a particular angle of inclination the match will start moving.
Putting one or more match boxes over the first one repeat the experiment;
you will see that every time for a particular angle the match box will start

\ moving. SS)

3.9.2 Effects of friction on motion

We already discussed that the frictional force always acts opposite to the applied
force. Therefore, naturally the frictional force slows down the motion and it may
2 be our assumption that perhaps we always try to reduce the friction. But that is
= not true. Sometimes you may have seen that a car or a truck is stuck in mud.
92 Physics

Though the wheel of the car rotates but due to less friction, the car or truck
cannot come out from the mud. The wheel slides. Then to rescue the car or truck,
the friction between the wheel and the mud is increased in an alternate way.

Tyre’s Surface: Because of the friction between the car’s tyre and the road the
car can move on the road. If this friction was not present, then the tyre of the
car would slip and the car would not be able to move forward. To increase this
friction many types of grooves are designed on the tyre (Figure 3.19), Those
who drive cars always give attention to whether the grooves of the car are
smooth or flat. If the grooves become flat, then after applying the brakes the car
will slip instead of stopping.
Smoothness off road: The roads are specially designed to increase the friction
between the tyre of the car and the road.

If the roads are not proper, then the
wheels of the cars may skid. After the
snowfall, in the cold countries, the
roads become very slippery due to ice
and the number of accidents increase
more than ten times. In our country the
friction of the road may decrease due to
water logging or due to gravel. All of
you have seen pitch carpeted roads, due
to this pitch carpeted the friction
between the tyre and the road increases.
At the same time, the rain water cannot Figure 3.19: To increase the
infiltrate into the road and the road can friction many types of grooves are
be used for a long time. designed in the tyre.

SS
<S

se

ial ——
Shee

_

Z
7
g
V
e
Nr

Controlling Motion and Breaking Force:

The speed of the vehicle has to increase or decrease according to the necessity
when we drive the vehicles. When the speed of the car is low, then it is easier to
control it. You can often see that during taking a turn or overtaking another car,
the speed of the car is lowered by applying the brakes.

When the driver presses on the brake pedal, this is transferred to the shoe or pad
attached to the wheel and the shoe presses down on the disc located inside the
wheel. Due to this pressure friction develops between the pad and disc and this
frictional force stops the motion of the wheel of the car.

2025
