2025

Chapter Twelve
Chemistry in Our Lives

SOME fO0d lOOKING soaps decorated wilh natura

We use different kinds of fertilizers in soil to boost its fertility. This fertilizer is
mainly made of chemical substances. We add baking soda with flour to inflate
bread, use vinegar or other food preservatives to preserve foods for a long time
at home and all these are chemical substances. Again, industrial discharges
which pollute the environment are also chemical substances. Chemical
substances play roles in every phase of our lives. This chapter will focus on the

preparation process of these chemical substances, their properties, uses etc,
explain the importance of collection, properties and uses of some
household food materials.

describe the importance of pH in determining suitability of
cosmetic materials at home.

explain the preparation of household cleaning substances and
mechanisms of cleaning.

control the pH value of soil in agriculture using appropriate
compounds.

explain the ways of processing agricultural products.

explain the means of preserving agricultural commodities.
explain the harmful effect of chemical waste by knowing it.
prepare soap by using chemical substances.

exhibit the de-colorization process of bleaching powder.

give opinion spontaneously with confidence about the appropriate
use of chemical substances to prevent the pollution of soil, water
and air,

show interest about using health conscious commodities.

show interest about using hygienic foods.

show the role of baking powder in food products by experiment.

2025
Chemistry in Our Lives 289

12.1 Domestic Chemistry/ House hold Chemistry

We use different kinds of chemical substances such as table salt, baking powder,
vinegar, soft drinks in our houses.

Table Salt or Edible salt

Huge amounts of table salt or sodium chloride (NaCl) along with a little quantity
of some other salts including NaCl, MgCl, are dissolved in sea water. Again
sufficient sodmum chloride is found underground as minerals. In our country
table salt is extracted from sea water. Salt cultivators in the coastal areas of our
country make dams around square or rectangular land of different sizes and keep
a small empty space there. When tide water enters through this space, the water
is contained inside by closing the entry point. When this water evaporates in
the presence of heat of sunlight, salts become visible. This method is called salt
harvesting. The salt collected through the harvesting process is processed into

edible salt through different processes in factories.
The salt collected through

harvesting process contains
sand. When this salt is mixed
with water in a pot, the salt is
dissolved in water but the sand
remains at the bottom of the pot.
Then the salt-water solution is
separated through filtration.
Again when this solution ts

Fig 12.01; Salt harvesting in the coastal area. heated, the water vaporizes but

the salt remains at the bottom of the pot. In this way, the processed salt is packed
and sent to different places for sale. We need different types of ions like Na*. K*
etc for smooth running of all activities in our body. If there is lack of Na’ in our
body due to any reason, this deficiency is filled up by taking NaCl with water.

Uses of NaCl: NaCl is used for different purposes, such as-

Forma-37, Chemistry Class-9-10
290 Chemistry

(i) We take curry with rice. The curry does not taste good if we do not use NaCl
in it.
(ii) NaCl is used in industries to prepare NaOH compound

(iii) NaCl is used in drug industries to manufacture salines for diarrhoea or
dehydration.

Baking Powder

Chemical name of baking soda or table soda is sodium hydrogen carbonate
(NaHCO, ). Baking soda is also called sodium bicarbonate. Baking powder is
produced when tartaric acid (C,I,O,) is mixed with baking soda (NalICO,).
Baking powder is usually used in making cakes.

Preparation of Baking Soda

Baking Soda can be prepared from ammonia gas, salt, water and carbon-
di- oxide. At first, saturated solution of NaCl is prepared by dissolving NaCl in
water. Again this solution is saturated by blowing NH, gas into the saturated
solution. Then carbon-di-oxide gas is blown into the NaCl solution saturated by
NH,. At this stage, at first CO,, NH,, H,O together produce Ammonium
Hydrogen Carbonate (NH,HCO,). Then the ammonium hydrogen carbonate
reacts with sodium chloride and produces sodium hydrogen carbonate or baking

soda,
CO, + NH;+H,O0 ———~* NHHCO,

NH HCO, + Nacl ————* NaHCO, + NH,Cl
Baking soda is separated from the reaction pot and then tartaric acid is mixed
with it. This mixture is called baking powder.
Uses of Baking Soda

During making cakes, baking powder is mixed with the flour of cake and heated.
Baking soda reacts with tartaric acid (C,H,O,) in the mixture and produces
sodium tartaret (C,H, Na,O,), CO, gas and H,O. Cakes rise up because of this
CO, gas.

2NaHCO, + CsH,0Q, ————*> C,HiNa,0,+ 2CO, + 2H,0

20235
2025

Chemistry in Our Lives 291

One type of fungus named ‘Yeast’ is also used at home or in bakery to inflate
bread. To do this initially yeast is added to a solution of sugar. If dough is made
with this mixture and kept in a warm place, carbon-di-oxide is produced because
of aerobic respiration of the yeast. This carbon-di-oxide helps the cakes to swell
up. When bread is baked in an oven after sufficient swelling, the yeast dies due
to the heat and swelling process of bread stops.

Mix baking powder and yeast with flour separately and keep it for some
time and make cakes with it. Compare the two cakes. If there is difference
between the cakes, explain the causes.

Vinegar

4% to 10% liquid solution of ethanoie acid is called Vinegar. Vinegar is a liquid
substance. Vinegar is generally used in making pickles,

Preparation of Vinegar

Vinegar or acetic acid or ethanoic acid (CH,COOH) is prepared by blowing the
bubble of oxygen gas into ethanol and acitobactor kept in a steel pot at 25°C to
35°C temperature.

Acitobactor

CH;CH,OH +0, =

CH,COOH + H,0
Roles of vinegar in preserving food

Pickles rot when bacteria attacks them. Bacteria cannot attacks pickles if
vinegar is applied to them. The main element of vinegar is ethanoic acid. When
vinegar is applied to pickles, the protein released by ethanoic acid damages the
H' bacteria and as a result. the foods remains safe from the attack of bacteria. In
this way food is preserved by using vinegar.

Soft Drinks
Soft drinks are prepared when carbon dioxide gas is dissolved in water at cold

temperatures and high pressures. Carbon dioxide and water react in soft drinks
and produce IL,CO,. People take soft drinks for digestion of food. However, there

is no scientific evidence for it.
292 Chemistry

12.2 Chemistry for Cleanliness

A sound mind in a sound body is called good health. We keep our body clean in
order to maintain good health. Our mind remains sound if our body is clean. We
use cosmetic soaps to keep our body clean. We use washing soda, bleaching
powder cic to keep our attire or clothes clean. We use glass cleaner to clean the
glass materials in our houses. We use toilet cleaner to keep our toilets clean. The
techniques for preparing these toiletrics and ways of cleaning are discussed
below:

Washing Soda

Sodium Carbonate (Na,CO,) is called soda ash. When 10 molecules of water are
chemically added to 1 molecule of soda ash, itis called washing soda. Chemical
name of washing soda is sodium carbonate deca hydrate (Na,CO,.10H,0).

Preparation of Washing Soda

When a large amount of CO, is passed through NaOH solution, it produces
sodium carbonate which is dissolved in water.

2Na0H + CO, —————* Na,CO, + H,0
There are Na,CO, and water in the reaction pot, Sodium carbonate joins with 10
molecules of water and produces washing soda (Na,CO,.10H,O).

Na,CO, + 10H,0 ——H—+* Na,C0,.10H,0

Uses of Washing Soda
Washing Soda is used to wash clothes.

Toilet Cleaner

Main ingredient of toilet Cleaner is sodium hydroxide (NaOH). In toilet
cleaners, Sodium Hypochlorite (NaOCl) remains mixed up with Sodium
Hydroxide. Toilet cleaner is used to clean basin, commode, etc. There are oily
materials, protein materials, organic and inorganic materials of different colours
and germs and bacteria in toilets, basins, commode etc. When toilet cleaner is

£023
2025

Chemistry in Our Lives 293
applied on toilets, basins, commode etc. sodium hydroxide reacts with oily and
protem materials and sodium hypochlorite reacts with substances and germs of

different colours and damages the efficiency of these germs and other
substances.

Mechanism of cleaning toilet with toilet cleaner

When toilet cleaner is poured on the toilet, different constituents of the toilet
cleaner react in different ways. Toilets become clean because of the alkaline
property of NaOH, the main element of the toilet cleaner.

Sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) of the toilet cleaner reacts with water and turns
into Hypochlorous acid (HOC) which breaks up and produces nascent oxygen.
This nascent oxygen transforms colourful substances into colourless ones and
alls germs.
Naocl + 1,0 ——-~ NaOH + Hoc!
HOCL ——> Hcl+[o]
Colourful Materials + [0] —————* _ colourless Materials

Germs + [0] ——__ Dead Germs

Thus toilet cleaners transform colourful substances into colourless ones and kills
germs. Oxygen atom in third brackets refers to nascent oxygen. Nascent

Oxygen =[O], Nascent oxygen refers toa newly formed, temporary reactive
oxygen atom that has not yet combined to form an O2 molecule.

Soap

Generally soap is the sodium salt (R-COONa) of higher fatty acid or Potassium
salt (R-COOK) of higher fatty acid. Here R is called an alkyl radical. General
formula of R is C.H,,,, and the value of n is 12 to 18, Example: Formula of
Sodium Stearate soap is C,,H,,COONa and the formula of Potassium Stearate
Soap is C,.H,,COOK, Sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide reacts with oil
or fat and produces soap and glycerine. The procedure of making soap and
glycerine is called saponification. If NaCl is added to the mixture of soap and
elycerine obtained from the saponification process, glycerine stays at the bottom
of the pot and the molecules of soap gather around NaCl and floats up in the
form of cakes. It is called soaps cake. The soap cake is filtered by strainers and
then poured into moulds to make soaps of different sizes.
294 Chemistry

Soap is a detergent which is produced from oil or fat and alkali. Based on use,
soap is mainly divided into two types- Toilet Soap and Laundry Soap.
Toilet Soap: The soap which is used for cleaning our skin is called Toilet Soap.

Laundry Soap: The soap which is used for washing our clothes is called
Laundry Soap.

While preparing soap, glycerine is also produced with soap. Oil. fat or alkali
may remain with the mixture of soap and glycerine. Soap is separated from
these. If there is excessive oil or fat in the soap during this separation, there
remains an oily situation in the soap. When this type of soap is used, it will not
make much scum. If there is excessive amount of alkali in the soap, its use is
harmful to our body. For this reason, while making in soap industries oil or fat
and alkali should be used proportionately so that oil or fat and alkali may react
completely. When carboxylic group is connected to a very big carbon chain, that
compound is called a higher fatty acid. Fatty acid reacts with alcohol or
glycerine and produces ester. If the tri-ester of higher fatty acid and glycerine is
in liquid state it is called oil and if in solid state, it is called fat.

Stearic Acid is a saturated fatty acid obtained from the fat in animal bodies.
There is a carbon-carbon single bond in saturated fatty acid and there is no
double or triple bond. The oil obtained from olives is called oltve oil. Olic acid
is obtained from olive oil. Olic acid is an unsaturated fatty acid. ‘There is
carbon-carbon double or triple bond in unsaturated fatty acids. The quantity of
alkali or other bad stuff is more in laundry soap and no scent or antibacterial
material is added to it, On the other hand, the quantity of alkali or other bad stuff
is less in toilet soap and scent or antibacterial material is added to it.

Detergent

Detergent is also a cleaning material like soap. Detergent usually looks like
powder and is also available in liquid form. Sulphuric acid (f1,SO,) reacts with
lauryl alcohol (C,,f,,O) and produces lauryl hydrogen sulphate (C,,1,,SO,) and
water, Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) reacts with this lauryl hydrogen sulphate
(C,,H,,80,) and produces sodium lauryl sulphate (C,,H,.SO,Na) and water
(H,0). Sodium lauryl sulphate (C,,H,.SO,Na) is known as detergent.

2025
2025

Chemistry in Our Lives 295

CigH,,<0 + H,S0, ———*  CyHy sO, + H,0
CigHys504 + NaOH ——> CigHySO,Na F H,0

Different types of materials are added to detergents in order to make it usable.
Sodium Sulphate (Na,$O,) is added to detergent to give it the shape of powder.

Cleaning mechanism of soap and detergent

The main work of detergent or soap is to remove oil and dust from clothes through
washing with water. Oily substances come out from our body and stick to our
clothes. Then dust come in contact withthe oily substances and makes dirt.
Soap (R-COONAa) or
detergent (C,,H,,SO,Na) is

a molecule of long chained 7 oe
carbon. In solution state, they - ‘
dissociate into negatively —— i
charged soap (R-COO) or Hydrophilic
detergent ion (C,,H,,50,) polar group Hydrophobic

d dis j non polar
an positively charged ein
sodium ion (Na*). There is

Water

negative charge at one end of
soap or detergent ion. As this
negatively charged end is
attracted by water, this

negative end is known a8 pig 127.92: Cleaning Mechanism with Soap or
hydrophilic. The other end of Detergent,

soap or detergent ion dissolves in oil or grease and this end is known as
hydrophobic.

When soap or detergent gets comes in contact with oily or greasy dirt of clothes
in the presence of water, the hydrophobic part is attracted by the oil or grease
and dissolves in it, On the other hand hydrophilic part extends to the water layer.
In this condition if clothes are rubbed or twisted, the particles of oily or greasy
dirt are completely covered by the negatively charged ion of soap or detergent
296 Chemistry

and a ring of negatively charge ion is formed around the particles of oily or
greasy dirt. Then they want to stay at possible maximum distance and form a
mixture of oil, soap and water. This mixture is known as scum, When more
water is added to this scum, oil and dusts are washed away with the scum. Thus
soap washes away dirt.

Differences between soap and detergent.

Soap Detergent

1. Soap is sodium or potassium salt | 1, Detergent is sodium salt of long
of long carbon chained fatty acids. carbon benzene sulfonic acid,

2, Detergent t well It wat
2. Soap cannot act well on salt water. See eater Seis Wet Mert ae ee

as well.
3. Soap has less cleaning capacity | 3. Detergent has less cleaning capacity
than detergent. than soap.

Bad effects of using excess soap or detergent

There are alkali, glycerine, oil, fat etc. in the soap. If soap is used excessively, its
alkali affects hands. If clothes are washed on the banks of ponds, pools or rivers,
soap scum reacts with the oxygen dissolved in water and reduces the quantity of
the dissolved oxygen. If the quantity of dissolved oxygen in water is reduced,
aquatic plants and fish living in water die. Thus excess uses of soap pollutes
water.

Detergent contains trisodium phosphate (Na,PO,). This trisodium phosphate
works as a good fertilizer for plants to live. As a result, the quantity of plants in
the pond increases. As the plants use the dissolved oxygen in water, fishes die
out because of the lack of oxygen, Thus excess uses of detergent pollute water.

Use of Toiletries: People use toiletries (soap, cream, shampoo) to clean skin,
retain beauty of skin, clean hair and other purposes. As you have learnt earlier,
the pH of skin is between 4.8 and 5.5. That means the skin has an acidic nature,
which prevents attack or origins of germs on skin. Again, if the pH value of
toiletries is more than 4.8 to 5.5, its use reduces acidity of skin which results in
damage of skin beauty and increase of germ attack. So there should be relevance
in the pH values of toiletries and skin.

2025
Chemistry in Our Lives 297

(— Preparation of soap

Hypothesis: Soap is produced by the reaction
of oil or fat with alkali. pH value of the
produced soap will be more than 7.

Materials: Coconut oil, Caustic soda,
Saturated solution of NaCl, Soap fom
market, Kerosene oil

Apparatus: Bunsen burner/spirit lamp/
kerosene cooker, 2 beakers of 400 mL, 2 test
tubes, one big porcelain bowl, one stirrer, one
spatula, one measuring cylinder (10 mL), one

funnel, one filter paper.

Safety measures: At high temperature
sodium hydroxide is a very corrosive
substance. So handle it with care so that no
accident occurs by spilling.

Fig 12.03: Preparation of Soap.

Do not use the produced soap on hand or body.

Procedure:

a. Prepare a steam bath in a beaker filled with water and put a porcelain
bowl in it as in the figure.

b. Take SmL coconut oil or Sg fat and 30mL Sodium hydroxide solution in

Le porcelain bow! y

Forma-38, Chemistry Class-9-10

208 Chemistry

(e. Boil the mixture in the steam bath for 30 minutes and stir it time to time. \
with the stirrer. Add water to maintain the deficit of water due to
evaporation, At this time a sticky substance will be formed by removal
of oily or fatty materials.

d. Then stop heating and let the mixture cool.

e. Add 50ml saturation solution of NaCl in the cold mixture and let it stay
overnight.

f. Next day filter the solution with filter paper and throw away the filtrate
let the soap dry.

Test of the produced soap

1. Take a test tube with one third of water and a piece of a specinien soap of
yours in it. Shake it well by closing the mouth of the test tube. Observe,
is there any foam formed or not?

2. Add 2/3 drops of kerosene in the test tube and shake it well and observe.
Explain the result by considering the kerosene as grease.

3, Determine the pH value of your soap,

4. Repeat the above three steps of the experiment with soaps from the

Ki. market and compare with your soap. Dy,

Bleaching Powder

Chemical name of bleaching powder is Calcium Oxychloro Chloride, Ca(OCHCI.
Bleaching powders is used to remove or make colourless the ink of ball-pen
or any other colour which cannot be removed from clothes by detergent or
soap. Besides, bleaching powder is also used for killing germs on floors,
commodes, basins etc. Bleaching powder is produced when Chlorine gas is
passed through the Calcium Hydroxide at 40°C temperature.

Ca(OH), + Cl, —E + ca(ocicl + H,0
Technique of removing colourful spot on clothes:

Bleaching powder makes the colourful spots of the clothes colourless. This is
why bleaching powder is called an anti-pigment. Spot of clothes and bleaching
powder both are chemical substances. When water is added to bleaching powder

20235
2025

Chemistry in Our Lives 299

after putting it on the dirt spot of clothes, bleaching powder reacts with water and
produces calcium chloride (CaC1,) and hypochloras acid (HOC).

ca(OChcl + H,9 ———* CaCl, + HOC]

HOC] breaks up and produces HCI and nascent oxygen [O|

Hoc] ——~+ _ HCl + [0]
Nascent oxygen [O] reacts with colourful material and makes the colourful

materials colourless.

Colourful material + [O] —H——+ colourless material

Technique of killing germs by bleaching powder

Bleaching powder is used to kill germs on house floors, commodes, basins etc.
When water is added to bleaching powder after putting the powder on floor,
commode, basin etc, bleaching powder reacts with water and turns into caletum
chloride (CaCl,) and hypochloras acid (HOC).

ca(ocl)cl + H,;O ———+* CaCl, + HOC]

Hypochloras acid breaks up and produces nascent oxygen [O] which kills germs.

Hoc] —————* HCl + [0]

Germs + [0] ————» dead germs

Glass Cleaner

The detergent which is used for cleaning glass is called a glass cleaner. When
there is oil, fat or grease on glass, they attract dust and makes dirt on glass. To
clean glass, such a kind of cleaning material is used which reacts with oil, fat or
grease but does not react with sodium silicate or calcium silicate, an element of
glass. Glass cleaner is usually prepared by mixing isopropyl alcohol,
CH,CH(OH)CIL, with ammonium hydroxide (NIT,ON) which is prepared by
dissolving ammonia gas in water. Ammonium [lydroxide is also known as
ammonia solution.

Technique of cleaning glass with glass cleaner

When glass cleaner is applied on glass, NH,OH reacts with oil, fat or grease on
the glass and removes them from the glass. If there is any organic substance on
300 Chemistry
the glass, isopropyl alcchol dissolves the organic substances and removes them
from the glass. Mask is to be used on the mouth and nose while cleaning glass

with glass cleaner because the ammonium hydroxide of the glass cleaner may
enter our nose and mouth.

Laboratory Production of Ammonia
gas

Ammonia gas is generally prepared in
the laboratory in two ways.

Ammonia is produced in the laboratory
by mixing and heating ammonium

chloride (NH,Cl) and calcium oxide
(CaO) in a test-tube. Figi2.04: Preparation of ammonia gas in
the laboratory.

2NH,Cl + CaQ. ~—————» 2NH, + CaCl, + H,0

Or, Ammonia gas, calcium chloride and water are produced when ammonia
chloride and slaked lime Ca(OH), are mixed and heated in a test-tube.

2NH,Cl(s) + Ca(OH), ——S-» 2NH, + CaCl, + 2H,0

Industrial Production of Ammonia Gas

Ammonia gas is produced by the Heber process in industries. Ammonia gas
(NH) is produced in the Heber process by mixing N, and H, gases at the ratio of
1:3 and heating the mixture at 450-550°C temperature after adding Fe catalyst.
(In 1:3 ratio, N, and H, refer to taking 3 times more H, than N,). Some heat is
also produced while producing ammonia gas. This is an exothermic reaction. In
one side, N, and EH, react and produce NH,. On the other side, some NH, gases
breaks up and turns into N, and H, gases. Two reversible arrows are used in this

reaction.
Fe
N.(g) + 3H{g) <= * 2NH, + 92k)

200-250 atm
450°C-550°C

£023
2025

Chemistry in Our Lives 30]

12.3 Chemistry in Agriculture and Industries

The fertility of soil is enhanced by applyimg different kinds of chemical
substances produced in industries. Lime stone (CaCQ,) is a Valuable mineral
resource. In our country huge quantities of lime stone is found nm Sunamgonj
district and Saint Martin Island. Various materials are made from lime stone. For
example, lime stone is used as the main element for producing cement. If the soil
becomes acidic that is the quantity of H* increases in the soil due to any reason,
lime stone is applied on that soil m order to reduce the acidity. Lime stone reacts
with H* and produces calcium ion (Ca**), carbon dioxide and water. As a result
the acidity of the soil is reduced.

CaCO,+ 2H*> = —@——— Ca* + CO, + HO

Urea

Urea is a valuable material. At first, ammonium carbamate (NH,COONH,) is
produced when the mixture of carbon-di-oxide and ammonia gas is heated at a
high pressure and 130°C-150°C temperature. Later, the ammonium carbamate
is broken and Urea (NH,-CO-NH,) is produced.

CO, + 2NH, ——“——-» NH,COONH,

NH,COONH, ————* NH,-CO-NH, + H,0
Urea is widely used in industries and agriculture. Melamine polymer is prepared
from Urea in mdustries. Urea is used as fertilizer in agriculture. Urea is applied
to soil so that plants can get enough Nitrogen nutrients from the Urea fertilizer.
Plants do not directly receive N, from air. In the presence of Ureaz Enzyme in
soil, Urea reacts with water and produces NH,*, OH and CO,. Plants absorb
this NH,".

NH,-CO-NH, + 3H,o Useaz Enzyme,

2NH, + 20H~ + CO,
Ammonium Sulphate

Ammonia reacts with sulphuric acid and produces ammonium sulphate
[(NH,),S0,] and water.

2N Hs + H2804 — (NHy4)250, + H,0
302 Chemistry

Ammonium sulphate is widely used in agriculture. Ammonium sulphate can
react with an alkali or base. So when the amount of alkali increases in soil,
Ammonium sulphate is used in soil to decrease the amount of alkali. It is a very
important nutrient for plants. Plants receive nitrogen and sulphur from it.

Chemicals in Processing Agricultural Commodities

Fruits, vegetables, fishes etc. are called agricultural commodities. The process
through which agricultural commodities are kept fresh for a long time or can be
saved from decay by using any chemical substance is called processing of
agricultural commodities. Use of chemical substances has both merits and
demerits. Mangoes get spots when the traders transport them from one place to
another by buses, trucks or trains. People do not want to buy these spotted
mangoes. For this reason unscrupulous traders buy green mangoes and transport
them from one place to another. As a result, the mangoes do not get spots. Then
the unscrupulous traders apply aqueous solution of calcium carbide on the
mangoes to ripen them. Again, acetylene is prepared by adding water to the
calcium carbide (CaC,).This acetylene gas helps in ripening fruits.
CaC, + 2H,Q Mm—H—+ (C,H, + Ca(OH),

Besides, mangoes are ripened by this ethylene gas. Ethylene also has a negative
impact on our body. Ripening mangoes by carbide means the process of ripening
mangoes by acetylene. Normally, ripe fruits release ethylene (a natural hormone)
gas, which causes surrounding unripe fruits to ripen.

Chemicals in Preserving Agricultural Commodities

Agricultural commodities are preserved by ice, table salt, vinegar ete. so that the
agricultural commodities do not become odorous or so that they do not decay.
Fishes are preserved by ice. Vinegar is used to preserve tomatoes. green
mangoes, elc. in containers. Vinegar enters our body with food but it does not
harm us. Foods are not preserved by formalin because it is harmful material for
man and animals, We may even die if formalin enters our body. Hence, formalin
should not be used to preserve food. Formalin is used in laboratories to preserve
dead animal bodies.

Some Recommended Food Preservatives

The chemical substances which protect food items from bacteria, bad smell, and

2025
2025

Chemistry in Our Lives 303

decay are called food preservatives, Recommended food preservatives are those
preservatives which do not harm our body and which are approved as food
preservatives by the World Health Organization. The preservatives which harm
our body are called unauthorized food preservatives. Sodium Benzoate, benzoic
acid, vinegar and solutions of salt and sugar ete are recommended food
preservatives. Ethylene, acetylene etc. are unauthorized food preservatives.

Industrial Disposal and Environment Pollution

Industrial disposals pollute the environment. In Bangladesh tannery, paint and
pesticide industries dispose different kinds of heavy meta! such as chromium
(Cr), lead (Pb), mercury (Hg). and cadmium (Cd) as industrial effluent. These
heavy metals or effluents enter the soil and water. They also enter the plants that
grow on this soil. When we eat fruits from these plants, the heavy metals also
enter our body and hurt our kidney and liver. They can even cause death . Again
a huge quantity of caustic soda (NaOH) are emitted from soap and
detergent factories into the soil and water. If NaOH goes into water, the level of
alkaline in water increases. As a result, aquatic animals and plants cannot live in

water properly.

1, What is the ratio of hydrogen and nitrogen in ammonia gas production?
a. 1:2 b. 1:3
E24 d. 3:1
2. NH, + H,SO, reaction —
(i) is a neutralization reaction
(ii) product is an important nutrient of plants
(iii) pH value of the liquid solution of the product is greater than 7
Which one of the followings is true?
(a) Land ii (b) ii and iii
(c) and ii (d) i, i and it
304 Chemistry

3. Which one makes the colourful materials colourless?

(a) Na(ON), {b) Caf(OCHC]
(c) HCl (d) CH,COOH
4. By which ion is the application of Urea on soil absorbed?
(a) OF (b) NH,*
(c) H* (d) Urea

1. Shawn, a student of class ten, after washing clothes in tube-well water saw
that the clothes were not so clear and there was not much foam in the water.
When he informed his friend Riyad of the matter, Riyad suggested to him to use
a detergent.

(a) What is soap?
(b) What is glass cleaner?
(c} Describe the cleaning mechanism of the first material that Shawn first
used to clean his clothes.
(d) Explain with logic why the cleaning material suggested by Riyad was
effective.

2. Dr. Chandra’s maid servant is taking rest due to her indigestion. Suddenly, the
lridge being out of order, Dr. Chandra becomes worried with uncooked fish,
meat, salt, baking powder and vinegar which she bought from the market. In the
meantime the maid servant feels better by taking baking powder secretly.
Knowing this matter, Dr. Chandra forbade her to take it in future.

a. What is the main constituent of the glass cleaner?

b. What is the role of air in ammonia industry in owr country?

c. By using which one of the stem did Dr. Chandra ask her maid to preserve
fish, meat? Explain.

d. Explain the chemistry, with reaction, about the cure of indigestion of the
maid servant in the stem.

2025

The End
