Chapter Fifteen
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)

Since inception the international organization United Nations (UN) has earned
tremendous success in achieving its goals, The United Nations is committed to
exploring everybody's potentials, dignity and equality, It has been trying to
achieve Sustainable Development Goals comprising elements of economic, social
and environmental development. We have learned about SDG in the previous
classes. It is to mention here that like other nations in the world, Bangladesh has
also been working towards achieving UN-set SDG. It’s not an easy job. lt needs
concerted efforts or partnership between the government and the people of this
country.

After the completion of the chapter we will be able to-

* explain the importance of partnership in achieving SDG;

* analyse results of achieving SDG;

® identify the challenges of achieving Sustainable Development Goals;

* explain actions needed to address challenges of achieving 5DG;

e design posters in order to create awareness among people about their
responsibilities in achieving SDG;

« be self-motivated in implementing SDG.

Forma-30, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
234 Geography and Environment

Lesson 1: Importance of partnership in achieving SDG

Before we have explained the importance of partnership in achieving SDG, we
need to know what partnership is. A group of people work for and enjoy the
benefits of any development are partners. They have some duties and
responsibilities to enjoy the benefits. They have ownership in the development
when they perform these duties and responsibilities perfectly. It is not possible for
any development worker or the government to continue the trend of development
alone. For example: for good
harvesting the government or any
development organization would
supply fertilizer and necessary
pesticides. But if the users use
more than what is needed
carelessly, it won't be friendly to
the environment, The user has to be
responsible in the use of required
amount of fertilizer and pesticides.
Partnership emphasises maximum
benefits for maximum number of
people. Whatever development be
carried out, it has to be done
considering the interest of all concerned, Whatever responsibility one has, he/she
has to be considerate from his/her respective position. Partnership is very vital in
implementing SDG, In this regard, everyone or every sector has a stake.
Everyone in the government or non-government sectors; every individual person
or groups at all levels of the society has to come forward and work together to
achieve the goals of sustainable development, And these efforts should be well
coordinated.

National partnership is an important issue in achieving in SDG. Not only the
people at the upper section of the society should be involved here, even the most
common people have to be included in this process. People should be made
conscious about their roles. In this regard the importance of international
partnership is immense. Achieving SDG is not only confined to any territory, it is
applicable to all nations in the world.

For this to work there should be partnership between the society and the
institutions that have influence over the state. There might be difference of interest
among the partners. The implementing countries will decide their priorities. For
example, holistic development is a top priority in Bangladesh. The main goal

2025
2025

Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 235

of sustainable development is to establish international cooperation which can be
established through mutual partnership. Each country will work for the macro
development of their own country as well as of the international community as per
their own capacity. [f some people are left behind, the development will not be
sustainable nationally or globally.

Task: Discuss why partnership is necessary for sustainable development.

Lesson 2: Probable results of achieving SDG

In order to safeguard the planet called the Earth, the implementation of SDG is
very important. Climate change has been a big concern for the conscious people of
the world. The effect of climate change has been affecting human beings, society,
agro production, and lives on land and in water. Bangladesh along with other
countries has been working to minimise the effect. Bangladesh is going ahead in
all indexes of economic and social consideration. The country’s poverty has
reduced, and its income has risen resulting in significant progress in capacity
building and economic growth. We have attained unprecedented success in
achieving MDG. We believe in consistent future development. We have earned
socio-economic capacity to march hand in hand with the world. We will stand
upright in the world forum. After we have achieved the MDG, now we are
working for SDG, We hope we will also achieve the goals successfully. This will
help drive out our poverty. Disparity will be reduced, there will be a balance
between earning and consumption. A peaceful co-existence will take place in the
world based on the mutual cooperation both at national and international levels.

The proposed advantages for Bangladesh by attaining SDG are-there will be no
burden of foreign loans, employment opportunity will be created, disparity
between men and women will disappear, all will work hand in hard for the
development of the country. The doors of education, culture and knowledge will
remain open. There will be free flow of information and right to information will
be protected. We will be able to think of ourselves as global citizens because of
the rapid development of communication system. We will move forward in the
field of sports, science and technology. All the facilities required to live in an open
world will be available to our doorsteps. We will be able to establish our dignity
as a peaceful and prosperous nation.

In a nutshell following are the probable results of achieving sustainable
development goals:

® The poverty line will be brought to almost zero.
236 Geography and Environment

The basic needs like food, cloths, shelter, health, education and entertainment
will be met.

Women repression will reduce due to gender equality and women
empowerment,

Environment for healthy living will be created through supply of clean water
and sanitation in both rural and urban areas.

Different natural disasters like flood, drought, tidal surge, cyclone, river
erosion will minimize.

Due to the raise of renewable sustainable energy, agro and industrial
production will increase,

Anarchy will reduce and stability will increase through justice in the society.
Political instability will reduce by strengthening democratic institutions.
Social, economic and political problems will be resolved through expanded
partnership with the other countries.

Task-1: What could be the advantages for Bangladesh by achieving

sustainable development goals? Discuss in groups. make posters and
present them.

Task-2: Draw a mind map on the advantages we will get upon achieving the

sustainable goals.

Lesson 3: The challenges of Bangladesh towards achieving

Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)

Bangladesh has achieved
unprecedented SUCCESS in
achieving UN declared

Millennium Development Goals
(MDG). The UN has assigned its
member states including
Bangladesh to work — with
partnership responsibility — in
achieving Sustainable
Development Goals (SDG). The
objective is to ensure universal
welfare all over the globe. In order
to attain equality and development
in the world with no disparity, the

Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)

2025
2025

Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 237

SDG have to be achieved by 2030. All the nations of the world are pledge-bound
to achieve these poals. We have learned about these in the previous class. This
lesson focuses the challenges Bangladesh may face in achieving these goals.

A country has to plan for total or holistic development to earn highest success.
Sustainable Development Goals are the structured plan of that total development.
The remarkable challenges for sustainable development goals are unequal
distribution of resources, disparity, and poverty, While we are talking about zero
poverty, the disparity of wealth and resources is being widened in the world.
Poverty has been acute due to the increasing gap between the rich and the poor.
The more the disparity lies with the resources in the world, the division between
the rich and the poor will be more obvious. And the more the division is, the more
will be the hatred and distaste.

The development the present world has been experiencing 1s not any balanced
development; it is rather creating further divisions among human beings. This
typical development has been rather creating and expanding discriminations
among humans and nations. This increasing acute discrimination and division are
barriers against SDG. Bangladesh is also not out of this situation. Although in the
recent time the rate of poverty and extreme poverty has reduced significantly here,
the gap between earning and consumption is still evident. Over the last few years,
although the rate of this disparity has reduced to some extent, it is still high, There
is no doubt about it that the disparity of wealth is raising rapidly in our country
too. A section of people is becoming immensely rich by grabbing the land, rivers,
forest or even capturing financial institutions in the society. This is creating an
imbalanced society and thus damaging the environment. Due to uninterrupted race
for development worldwide and use of unplanned fossil-energy, the adverse
impacts of climate change are obvious to all. Lack of transparency and
accountability down from individual to collective level has become a challenge
towards achieving the SDG,

Lack of co-ordination and partnership between public and private institutions
may pose a threat for sustainable development. Not only the disparity of wealth;
but also the disparity of earning, consumption, and gender; even the regional
disparity could become a challenge towards sustamable development. The
problems originating out of unplanned imdustrializaion and urbanization
account for challenges towards achieving Sustainable Development Goals. Lack
of measures in addressing natural or social disasters would also slow down the
process of development. Achieving the sustainable development goals appears
238 Geography and Environment

to be difficult considering weaknesses in infrastructural development; shortage
of gas, fuel and power supply; and mismanagement in appropriate marketing of
agro-products,

Task-L: Identify Bangladesh's challenges in achieving SDG.
Task-2: ‘Disparity in all sectors is the biggest challenge im achieving SDG’ - give
reasons in favour of and against the statement.

Task-3: ‘Climate change and environment pollution is the main challenge to
achieve SDG’- arrange a debate on the issue in the class.

Lesson 4: Actions needed to address the challenges

We have known that sustainable development focuses society, economic and
conservation of environment. These are the elementary issues to consider, Lf any
development plan is formulated and implemented keeping these things in
consideration, it is expected that the sustainable development will take place in all
sectors. It is not possible on the part of the government alone, or any individual or
institution, to address the challenges of sustainable development goals. Each of us,
from our own position has to come forward in this regard, When a person
becomes conscious, the members of his/her family will also become conscious,
Awareness leads a nation to a step ahead, For example: one of the challenges of
development is environment pollution.

We know - heavy rainfall causes water logging in big cities, It hampers road
transportation and damayes roads and walkways; the low earning group of people
loses their work; people cannot reach schools, colleges or work places in time, and
shops remain closed. During this time there is outbreak of different diseases. In
fact, we have destroyed our cities on our own. Instead of throwing away litters,
polythene bags, used packets of chips in a specific place: we throw them away
indiscriminately. As a result, roadside sewerage is blocked and water cannot make
its way, Due to long time water stagnation, different problems and crisis occur.
We have to come out of these practices. At first we have to be aware of the
consequences of such activities. We have realized that Bangladesh has to face a
bundle of challenges in implementing SDG. We will now identify the steps we
need to take to meet all these challenges.

2025
2025

Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 239

To bring disparity at all levels down to a tolerable level is very important for
implementing SDG. Reducing disparity in income, consumption, gender, region
and wealth to a greater extent is needed to eradicate poverty in all sectors. For
this, appropriate strategies should be taken and they should be institutionalized.
Adopting and implementing coordinated programs with the participation of the
government and other partners has to be undertaken, Resource mobilization
from home and abroad has to be expedited. Ensuring uninterrupted flow of
information and analysis of data, an acceptable databank has to be included in
sustainable development program. To address the effects of climate change,
conservation of environment and development, measures have to be taken
according to necessity. In this regard, enhancing skills of the common mass and
creating employment opportunities for them as well as reasonable supply of fund
or wealth should be ensured. Besides facilities for education, health care, training
and other services, infrastructural facilities have to be enhanced as per the
necessity, In this regard, skills development of general people is important.
Creating facilities for them and providing them with institutional assistance are
equally important. If these opportunities are created, people can mobilize
resources using their skills and contribute to the social development process of the
country,

In addition, process of policy planning, formulating plan on priority basis and
improving institutional and socio-economic environment need to be strengthened.
In addition, monitoring and mentoring are imperative at every step of
implementing plans. Strong political commitment is needed to include everyone in
this endeavor in implementing the sustainable development goals. Besides
political unrest has to be stopped. Measures have to be taken to stop money
laundering. For the expansion of rural economy the non-agro sector has to be
given priority. Priority should be given to different deprived communities and far
flung regions of the country in development planning. Special programs are
needed to eradicate extreme poverty and minimise poverty rate. Economic policy
should be taken in a way so that socio-economic development appears even.
Priority has ta be given on the improvement of education, culture, health and
sanitation. Apart from increasing budgetary allocations in these sectors,
management and monitoring has to be strengthened.

The main focus of sustainable development is to keep the trend of development
and progress sustainable and expedite its speed. We are dreaming to make a
digital Bangladesh with middle-income status by 2021, achieve SDG by 2030 and
turn Bangladesh into a developed country by 2041. For these to happen, we all
240) Geography and Environment

have to join the journey towards development, If this is not done, there may be a
rise in our growth rate, but it will never be sustainable. We have to ensure that
everyone has equal rights as a citizen of the country and everyone has equal
human dignity. There has to be improvement and awakening in education and
cultural sectors. Although the energy sector has been given priority in the present
budget, strong monitoring is needed at implementation level. Measures have to be
taken to address the challenges needed for carrying out investigation on land and
in the sea to ensure gas supply.

Whatever be the development, there are some negative factors attached to that and
they affect the socio-economic condition of a country. For example: the country
has advanced immensely in ICT, but we are undergoing some negative experience
as well due to insufficient precautions to defend them. For example, our young
children are falling victims to the misuse of IT. Therefore, before considering
anything as good, we should take precautions considering its adversity and risk
factors. If this is done, we can address risk factors.

If we undertake development plans considering these factors seriously and
proceed to implement them; the result could meet our expectations, It is obvious
that every society has some existing problems as well as a few new to add the list.
This sometimes gives birth to unwanted situations. The most daunting task at
present is to make the progress achieved so far balanced and consolidated. Besides
initiatives should be taken to speed it up up further. This needs both human
capacity building and human development. Among others adopting different
programs based on priorities, effective implementation of the planned activities,
stopping any kind of waste, combating corruption and inclusion of the country’s
citizens in the process of socio-economic development are also vital. Equally
important is to ensure transparency and accountability of the state.

Task 1: Identify the action needed to address the challenges towards achieving

SDG.

Task 2: How can we contribute towards achieving sustainable development?
Discuss in groups and write an essay in 200 words.

2025
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 241
Exercise

Multiple choice questions
1. Which of the following introduces mutual partnership?
a. co-operation of a certain group
b. economic and social cooperation
c. national and international cooperation
d. co-operation of the state

2. The effect of which change has made the conscious people of the world

anxious?
a. birth rate b. climate
c. temperature d. social index

Read the following stem and answer questions 3, 4 and 5.

Mr. Shahed Monsur began his speech on Development planning and
Bangladesh saying “The achievement in 2015 has inspired Bangladesh to
achieve the goals a UN declared programme by 2030", At the end of his
speech he said. “We will establish our nation as a happy and prosperous one by

achieving the goals and ensuring gender equality between male and female by
2030".

3. What success of 2015 did Mr. Shahed mention in his speech?
a. SDG h, MDG
é: environmental development d. social development
4, The last comment of Mr. Shahed highlights
i. the probable result of achieving the goals
i, the advantages of achieving the goals
iil, the dreams of a brilliant future
Which of the above statements is true?
a. iand ii b. ii and iii

c. i and iii d. i, ii, and ii

Forma-31, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
242

Geography and Environment

Creative Question

Scene 1: | A real estate company, after filling some portions of the river
Balu, is selling out plots by displaying billboards on the land beside.

Scene 2: | The tannery industry has been shifted to Savar, but the waste
management has not been done yet. The garbage is being dumped
into the nearby canal.

Scene3 |The citizens of City Corporation A have made their areas

beautiful and livable by maintaining their own roles and

responsibilities instead of depending on the government.

af  B

What is the climate programme?

Why is partnership needed in sustainable development?

Explain which areas have been indicated in scene-| and scene-2?
Evaluate this statement — Scene 3 is an example of how to ensure

holistic and universal development all over the world. .

The End

2025
