Chapter Nine
Acid-Base Balance

Most of fruits slightly acidic.

We use various kinds of compounds in a chemical laboratory. Acids, bases and
salts are most frequently used. As chemistry learners, you also need to learn
about acid. base and salt. We mostly use diluted acids and bases instead of
concentrated acids or bases in our laboratories. We take in acids, bases and salts
with our food which is important for our bodies. Salt is formed by neutralizing
acid with base or vice versa, We can determine the acidity from various
experiments in the laboratory. Litmus test and pH value test are the most
commonly used, These necessary acids, bases and salts are also harmful to some
extent to our environment. We will discuss about all these in this chapter.

2025
2025

Acid- Base Balance 207

explain the characteristics of acids, bases and salts

identify acids, bases and salts from your everyday surroundings
differentiate between basic and alkaline substances

describe the effect of acid and base on common materials

evaluate the financial effect of acid and alkaline materials on our
household materials

explain the concept of pH.

explain the importance of measuring pH

realize the importance of equilibrium of acid-base in the maintenance
of environmental balance

explain the cause of acid rain, its hazards and the ways of protection
from it

explain the water cycle

explain the hardness of water

identify the advantages of using hard water

explain the financial losses due to use of hard water

describe the causes of water pollution and the means of water
purification
mention the harms of drinking arsenic contaminated water
determine the nature of household/lab/saline water measuring the pH
comparing the nature of compounds (acid, base) by determining the
pH value or Litmus test or universal indicator

show interest in using pollution free water

show awareness about the terrible side of acid violence and make
others aware of them

exhibit effects of acid and base on useful materials with experiments
take appropriate precautions in using acidic and basic materials
208 Chemistry

9.1 Acid

Acid is highly important among chemicals. Acid is a kind of chemical which,
when dissolved in water decomposes into hydrogen ion or proton (H*).
Hydrochloric acid (HCI), sulfuric acid (H,SO,) etc. are concentrated acids, so
they get decomposed in aqueous solution:

Hcl{aq) ————® H*(aq) + Cl(aq)
H,S0,(aq) ————®  2H*(aq) + SO,’ (aq)
Again, carbolic acid (H,CO,), acetic acid (CH,COOH) etc. are diluted acids.
They decompose in aqueous solution in the following manner:

HyCO3(aq) —=* 2H*(aq) + CO,*(aq)

CH,COOH(ag) ——— _ HYlaq) + CH,COO-(aq)

In the case with HCl] and 1,50, the decomposition is shown by moonfaced
arrow mark. That means, these acids get 100% decomposed in water. That is why
they are called strong acids. The decomposition of the later two acids are shown
wilh dual faced arrows, meaning they are partially decomposed in water.
That is why they are called weak acids. For instance, at 25°C temperature, out
of 1000 CH,COOH molecules, only 4 will be decomposed in water, The rest
996 molecules remain mtact in water. When the amount of acid in the solution
of acid and water is higher than water, the solution is called a concentrated
acid. When the amount of water in such solutions is higher, it is known as
a dilute acid. Acid tastes sour. You have certainly tasted tamarind which is
too sour. Tamarind contains tartaric acid which makes it sour. Blue litmus turns
red when it is put in an acidic solution.

Acid undergoes a reaction with metallic oxide and produces salt and water:

CaO + 2HCl ——  cacl, 4 H,0
Calcium oxide Hydrochloric acid Calcium chloride Water
(Metallice oxide) (Acid) (Salt)

2025
Acid-Base Balance 209

Acid undergoes a reaction with more reactive metals to produce salt and
hydrogen gas.

2Na + 2Hcl ——$————» _ 2Nacl + Hi
Sodium Hydrochloric acid Sodium chloride Hydrogen
(Metal) (Acid) (Salt)

The food items that we take everyday contains various acids. For example, milk
contains lactic acid, soit drinks contain carbonic acid, lemon or orange has citric
acid, tamarind has tartaric acid, vinegar has ethanoic acid, tea contains tannic
acid etc. When we eat or take these foods, the acids go inside our body. They
help in digesting our food and prevent diseases, Besides, there are pickles
containing different acids which act as appetizers. Since these acids are weak
they cannot harm our health. Inside the body, the stomach wall generates
hydrochloric acid which is a very strong acid. It is used for decomposing food
inside, However, sometimes there is excess secretion of HCl! from the stomach
which starts to decompose the cells of the stomach wall. Again, if we remain
hungry or keep our stomach empty, the HCl decomposes the cells of the stomach
hurting the stomach living for which we feel pain. This situation is called peptic
ulcer. Therefore, we need to avoid the foods that inspire excess secretion of acid
and to stay without food for a long time as well. The chapter will let you know
many other properties and uses of acid.

9.1.1 Demonstrating Properties of Dilute Acids through Experiments

(i) Taste: All dilute acids are sour in taste. We have already seen that the acidic
foods are sour, However, remain careful not to taste any acid in the laboratory. If
your tongue comes in contact with any of these acids, they will instantly corrode
your tongue. You may try the taste of tamarind instead which will tell you
tartaric acid tastes sour.

(ii) Corrosive: Acids are corrosive. If you put a piece of metal im acid, the outer
edge of the metal will be corroded,

(iii) Litmus Test: Acid turns blue litmus into red, Take 2-3 mL hydrochloric
acid ina test tube and add a blue litmus to it. You will see, the blue colour will

Forma-27, Chemistry Class-9-10
210 Chemistry

turn red. You may try the same test with H,SO,, HNO, or any other acid. Even
tamarind or pickles will give you the same result.

(iv) Reaction with Reactive Metals: An Acid undergoes a reaction with
reactive metals (K, Na, Mg etc.) and produces salts of that metal and hydrogen
as well. For example. Mg undergoes a reaction with sulfuric acid and produces
MgsO, and H, gas.
Me +H,;sO,  ———* Mes0, + H,T
(v) Reaction between Dilute Acid and Metallic Carbonate: Dilute acids
undergo reactions with metallic carbonate to produce salt, water and carbon
dioxide. For example, calcium carbonate and dilute HCl undergo a reaction and
produce calcium chloride salt, water and carbon dioxide gas. The gas comes out
in bubbles.
CaCO, + 2HCl ——> _ cach +H,0 + CO,f

Channel this produced carbon dioxide in lime water, the lime water will turn
turbid, The reaction is:
Ca(OH), + CO. ——————_* CaCO, + H;0

The lime water looks turbid as insoluble CaCO, is produced at this stage. This
turbid lime water again turns opaque when extra CO, is channeled in. At this
stage CO, and H,O undergo a reaction with CaCO, and produce soluble
calcium bicarbonate [Ca(HCO,),] which makes the water look opaque.

CaCO; + CO, + H,O = ————» Ca(HCO,)

The metallic carbonates undergo the similar kind of reactions with dilute sulfuric
acid or dilute nitric acid and produce sulfate or nitrate salts.

Na,CO, + H,SO, WH» Na,S0,+ H,O + CO,
CaCO, + 2HNO, —~» Ca(NO,), + H,0 + CO,

20235
2025

Acid- Base Balance 211

(vi) Reaction between Dilute Acids and Metallic Bicarbonates: Metallic
hydrogen carbonates or metallic bicarbonates also undergo reactions with dilute
acids and produce salts, water and carbon dioxide. For Example:

Ca{HCO,), + 2HCl ———+ Catl,+2H,0 + 2c0,

2NaHCO, + H,SO, —M—» Na,SO,+ 2H,0+ 2C0,

NaHCO, + HNOs —— NaNdO, + H,0 + CO,
(vii) Reaction between Dilute Acids and Metal’s Hydroxides (Alkali): Dilute
acids undergo reactions with metal’s hydroxides and produce salt and water. It is
a neutralizing reaction. For example, if dilute HCl] solution is slowly added to

dilute NaOH solution, it produces NaCl (salt) and water.
NaOH + HC] ———* Nac] + H,0

(viii) Reaction between Dilute Acids and Metal’s Oxides: Acids undergo
reactions with metal’s oxides and produce salt and water. The oxides are usually
of alkaline nature. That is why the reactions here are also neutralizing reactions.

CaO +2Hcl ——— Cacl, +H,0

In the same way, copper oxide undergoes a reaction with dilute sulfuric acid and
forms copper sulfate and water.

Hy80, + CuQ  MM——» CuSO, + H,0

Or, calcium oxide and nitric acid undergo a reaction to produce calcium nitrate
and water.

2HNO, + Cao eo Ca(NOs)s + H,0

9.1.2 The Role of Water in Chemical Properties of Acids

Tn all the discussions above, we have used the phrase “Dilute acid’. Dilute acid
solution means acid has been added to water to make an acidic solution. The
question is whether an acid can maintain its properties when added to water or
they undergo changes. Suppose, you have taken some oxalic acid lattice and put
a dry blue litmus paper on them. You will observe no change in the colour of
litmus. ‘he reason here is that dehydrated oxalic acid lattice does not contain
any hydrogen ion. When you dissolve this dehydrated oxalic acid in water, it
212 Chemistry

will decompose and donate an H* ion, which will turn the blue litmus into red.
That means. the hydrogen ion present in an aqueous solution shows acidic
property.

Citric acid partially decomposes in aqueous solution, The same thing happens in
the case with ethanoic acid and carbonic acid too.

Partial decomposition means instead of all molecules added in the solution, some
of them decompose and the rest remains intact.

Citric acid lattice + water — Citric acid (aq)

Citric acid (aq) ~ H* (aq) + citrate ion
Hydrogen chloride is completely ionized in aqueous solution and produces
hydrogen ion:
Hydrogen chloride + water — HCl (aq)

HCl (aq) > Ht (aq) + Cr (aq)

Pure sulfuric acid and nitric acid are colourless liquids. Both the compounds
remain in the molecular state. Since they are not ionized or hydrogen ion is not
present in them, pure sulfuric acid and pure nitric acid neither show acidic
properties nor do they conduct electricity. They produce hydrogen ion only when
they are dissolved in water, showing an acidic property and conducting
electricity. So, we can write,

H,50,(1) + water ————* H,50,(aq)
H,50,(aq) ———* 2H" (aq) + SO,” (aq)

Similarly,

HNO; (1) + water ————» __HNO,,(aq)
HNO,(aq) ————* Ht (aq) + NO; (aq)

The acids that get partially ionized in aqueous solution are weak acids, Strong
acids ionize completely in aqueous solution. That shows the weak acids have
lesser amount of hydrogen ions. Strong acids have comparatively greater
number of hydrogen ions.

£023
2025

Acid-Base Balance 213

9.1.3 Concentrated Acids

The acid that contains comparatively lesser amount of water is concentrated
acid, Different concentrated acids like concentrated hydrochloric acid (HCI).
concentrated sulfuric acid (H,SO,). concentrated nitric acid (HNO,) etc. are used
in laboratories. at different times. If these acids come in contact with our body
parts. they create injury on those spots. That is why, when using these acids, we
need to put on hand gloves, goggles, mask, apron etc. for safety.

Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid: The solution that is produced when
hydrogen chloride gas is dissolved in water is called hydrochloric acid. In the
solution the amount of water is comparatively lesser than the amount of
hydrogen chloride gas. The moment the cork of the container bottle of
concentrated HC! is opened, there is a fog created and a highly pungent smell
spreads all over. That is why, before opening the botile of concentrated HCI,
nose and mouth should be covered with a mask and eyes should be protected
with goggles,

HCI(g) + H,0(0) ————» HCl(aq)

Concentrated Nitric Acid: The solution that is produced when nitrogen dioxide
gas is dissolved in water ts called nitric acid. Comparatively higher amounts of
NO, gas is dissolved in a small amount of water to prepare nitric acid (HNO,).

3NO0, + HO —_—_ 2HNO; + NO

The moment the cork of the container bottle of concentrated HNO, is opened,
there is a fog created and a highly pungent smell spreads all over. The colour of
the container bottle of nitric acid is brown. It is for preventing light for if light
enters the bottle, the HNO, decomposes. The brown colour of the bottle prevents
light to enter the bottle.

Concentrated Sulfuric Acid: The solution that is produced when sulfur dioxide
gas is dissolved in water is called sulfuric acid. Comparatively higher amounts
of SO, gas is dissolved in a small amount of water to prepare sulfuric acid

(H,SO,).

504 =f H;0 -_ H,50,
WN4 Chemistry

9.2 Base and Alkali

Base: Generally, metals or metal like reactive radical oxides and hydroxides that
undergo reactions with acids and produce salt and water are called bases.
Examples:
CaO + 2HC] Hse. = Cacl, + H,0
2KOH + H,SOQ, —M—-+ k,S0, + 2H,0
NH,OH + HCl ————» NH,Cl+H,0

Apart from CaO and KOH, examples of bases are sodium oxide (Na,O), copper
oxide (CuO), ferrous oxide (FeO), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), calcium
hydroxide [Ca(OH),], ferrous hydroxide [Fe(OH),], ammonium hydroxide
(NH,OH) etc.

Ammonium ion (NH,"), phosphonium ion (PH,”), etc. radicals are reactive like
metals, Metallic ions like Na’, K~ etc. combined with non-metallic ions like Cl,
SO,* ete. produce ionic compounds like NaCl, KCl, Na,SO,, K,SO, etc.
Similarly, NH,’, PH,’ ions combined with Cl, SO ye ions produce ionic
compounds NH,Cl, PH,Cl, (NH,),SO,, (PH,),50, etc. The reaction between
acids and bases that produces salt and water are called acid-base neutralizing
reactions, Therefore it is said that acid neutralizes a base and a base neutralizes
an acid.

Alkali: Hydroxide compounds of metals or metal like reactive radicals that are
soluble in water are called alkali. A compound can be an alkali if (i) it contains
a hydroxide (OH) radical and (ii) it dissolves in water.

NaOH is an alkali for it has an OH radical and it dissolves in water. Fe(OH),
cannot be called an alkali for although it has an OH’ radical, it does not dissolve
in water. It is base only. CaO is base but not an alkali for it does not contain an
OF radical. So, you realize, the bases containing OH radicals and soluble in
water are alkali. Thus it can be said, all bases are not alkali but all alkalis are
bases.

There are many basic compounds in our household, The toilet cleaners in our
houses are base containing sodium hydroxide (NaOH), the glass cleaners
containing ammonium hydroxide (NH,OH) are bases.

2025
2025

Acid-Base Balance 215

9.2.1 Properties of Dilute Bases

The solution prepared by adding comparative smaller amounts of base in larger
amount of water is called a dilute base.

Litmus Test: Take a small amount of dilute sodium hydroxide solution in a test
tube. Put a piece of red litmus paper in it, You will see the red litmus will turn
blue. Again, take some NaQH solution in a test tube. Put a blue litmus paper
in the tube. The blue litmus will remain as it is, blue. This proves, the basic

solution only turns red litmus into blue.

Feelings: If you touch NaOH solution with your hand, it will feel slippery. Basic
compounds are slippery. Some properties of base are discussed here. However,
contact with base harms our skin.

92.2 Dilute Base in Reaction with Metallic Salts

Undergoing reaction with aluminum nitrate [AI(NO,),], ferrous nitrate
[Fe(NO,),|, ferric nitrate [Fe(NO,),]|, zine nitrate [Zn(NO,),] etc. metallic salts,
dilute base produces the related metallic hydroxide. Mentionable, here we have
used only nitrate salts. Apart from it, metallic chloride, metallic sulfate, metallic
sulfate salts will produce the same result. Look at the following example:

Reaction between dilute NaOH and Al(NO,),

If we take some AI(NO,), solution in a test tube and add some drops of dilute
NaOH solution im it, they produce aluminum hydroxide [Al(OH),] and sodium
nitrate (NaNO ,): AL(OH), gathers as white precipitate at the bottom of the test
tube while sodium nitrate remains dissolved in the water and it does not add any
colour to the water. The reaction:

AI(NO,); + 3NaQH ———*  AI(OH),| + 3NaNC,

Reaction between dilute NaOH and Fe(NO,),

If we take some ferrous nitrate Fe(NO,), solution in a test tube and add some
drops of dilute NaOH solution to it, ferrous hydroxide [Fe(OH),| and sodium
nitrate (NaNO,) are produced. Fe(OH), gathers as green precipitate at the bottom
of the test tube while sodium nitrate remains dissolved in the water and it does
216 Chemistry

not add any colour to the water. The reaction:

Fe(NO.), + 2NaOH
Reaction between dilute NaOH and Fe(NO,),

Fe(OH),| + 2NaNO;

If we take some ferric nitrate Fe(NO,), solution m a test tube and add some
drops of dilute NaOH solution in it, they produce ferric hydroxide [Fe(OT),]
and sodium nitrate (NaNO,). Fe(OM), gathers as a reddish brown precipitate at
the bottom of the test tube while sodium nitrate remains dissolved in the water
and it does not add any colour to the water. The reaction:

Fe(NO,); + 3NaQH —————*  Fe(OH),| + 3NaNO,

Reaction between dilute NaOH and Cu(NQ,),

If we take some copper nitrate [Cu(NO,),| solution in a test tube and add some
drops of dilute NaOH solution to it, copper hydroxide [Cu(OH),]| and sodium
nitrate (NaNO,) are produced. Cu(OH), gathers as light blue precipitate at the
bottom of the test tube while sodium nitrate remains dissolved in the water and
it does not add any colour to the water. The reaction:

Cu(NO,), + 2NaOH Cul(OH),| + 2NaNO,

Reaction between dilute NaOH and Zn(NO,),

If we take some zine nitrate [Zn(NO,),| solution in a test tube and add some
drops of dilute NaOH solution to it, zme hydroxide [Zn(OH),| and sodium
nitrate (NaNO,) are produced, Fe(OH), gathers as white precipitate at the
botiom of the tesi tube while sodium nitraie remains dissolved in the water and
it does not add any colour to the water. The reaction:

Zn(NQ3), + Z2NaQH ————* Zn(OH),) + 2NaNO;

Reaction between Alkali (dilute NaOH) and Ammonium Salt

If we take some ammonium chloride (NH,CI) in a container and add some alkali
(NaOH) solution to it, we get ammonia gas (NH,), sodium chloride (NaCI) and
water (HO). The reaction:

NH,Cl + NaQH —————* NH; + NaCl + H,0

2025
Acid- Base Balance 217

Tt is a characteristic reaction between ammonium salt and alkali. Alkali
undergoes a reaction with any ammonium salt and produces NH, gas. Examples:

NH,Cl + KOH ————* NH, + KCl + H,0
2NH4Cl + Ca(OH), M———» 2NH, + CaCl, + 21,0
2NH,C] + CaO ———_—-» _ 2NH; + CaCl, + H,0

9.2.3. Role of Water in the Chemical Properties of Alkali

Both the compounds potassium hydroxide and sodium hydroxide have ions, but
when they are in solid state, the ions are not free. The noment they are dissolved,
they become fully ionized and produce free hydroxide tons. Only hydroxide ions
in the solution carry a negative charge.

KOH(s) +Water ————*  K+(aq) + OH-(aq)

NaOH(s) + Water-———*  Nav(aq) + OH (aq)

Ammonia gas is the summation of ammonia molecules. When ammonia gas Is
dissolved in water, their reaction produces ammonium ion and hydroxide ion.
However, ammonia dissolves only partially in water and a very small number of
hydroxide ion is produced.

Therefore, ammonia solution contains ammonia molecules, water molecules and
a small number of anmmonium and hydroxide ions. The characteristic of an alkali
solution depends on the presence of mobile hydroxide ions. The alkalis that
dissolve partially in aqueous solution are weak alkali. Strong alkali becomes
fully ionized in aqueous solution. That means, the weak alkali solution consists
of lesser number of hydroxide ions than that of the strong alkali.

Complete the following tasks. Describe a change that is observable. Write
down the ionic equation.

Addition of iron ----- to dilute sulfuric acid solution.
Addition of solid sodium carbonate to dilute hydrochloric acid solution,

Addition of ammonia solution to copper sulfate solution,

Forma-28, Chemistry Class-9-10
218 Chemistry

9.3 Corrosive Properties of Concentrated Acids and Alkali

Concentrated acids and concentrated alkali are highly corrosive. They can
corrode clothes and skin. They can damage the eyes if they go into the eyes,
Concentrated acids and concentrated alkali are added slowly to water and tumed
into dilute solutions as they dissolve completely.

If by any chance, concentrated acids and concentrated alkali come into contact
with your body, the spot must be cleaned time and again. Then you should

inform your teacher.

Experiment of Strong and Weak Acids or Strong and Weak Alkali

An experiment will tell you which acid is strong and which is weak. Take
50 mL dilute hydrochloric acid in a beaker. Now set two graphite rods in
the beaker in a way so that they do not touch each other. Connect one
graphite rod with an edge of a battery by a wire and the second graphite
with the other edge of the battery taking the wire through a bulb. The bulb
will light up. Observe the brightness of the light.

Now take some ethanoic acid in another beaker, It is a weak acid. Set two
graphite rods in this beaker also. Connect one graphite rod with the edge
of a battery by a wire and the second graphite with the other edge of the
battery talcing the wire through a bulb. The bulb will light up. Observe the
brightness of the bulb. You will see the brightness of the bulb in the beaker

containing HCl solution is better than the one in ethanoic acid.

% x

Strong acids provide more H* in the aqueous solution than the weak acids. This
excess amount of H” conducts more electricity in the solution. That is why the
bulb in the strong acid gives more light. On the other hand, the weak acid
supplies lesser number of H*in the aqueous solution resulting in lesser

20235
2025

Acid- Base Balance 219
amount of electricity conduction in the solution, So, the bulb gives less light.
Weak acid = Lesser amount of H* (proton) produced

Strong acid — Greater amount of H* (proton) produced

Similarly, an experiment with strong alkali (NaOH) and weak alkali (NH,OH)
will prove that the bulb in the solution of NaOH will give a brighter light and the
bulb in the solution of NH,OH will give a dim light. So, it will be proved that
NaOH is a strong alkali and NH,OH is a weak alkali.

9.4 The Conception of pH

pH is used as a unit to determine the nature of a aqueous solution, a measure of
the acidity, alkalinity or neutrality of the solution. The pH of a solution is the
negative logarithm of concentration of hydrogen ions present in the solution.

c=

Where p is written in small hand letter and H is capitalized.

That means-

[H"] expresses the molar concentration of H* ions; how many moles of H* ions
are there in one liter solution.

The presence of H™ in 1 liter distilled water is 107 moles

The pH of distilled water = -log[H*] = -log(10°-7)

So, the pH of distilled water = 7

When there is any ion within the third bracket in molarity unit, the concentration
of the ion is expressed. If acid is added to distilled water and for this reason, the

number of H* increases 10 times to make it 10° moles per liter, the pH of the

solution will drop down.
pH = —log[10~*] = 6

The more the molarity of H+ ion, the lesser the value of pH will be.

Tf alkali is added to distilled water, the OW of alkali will undergo a reaction with
H’ and lessen the number of H*. For example, due to adding alkali in water, if
the number of H* drops down to 10°? moles per liter. then the pH will be:
220 Chemistry
pH = —log[10-"] = 10

That means, the pH value will nse from 7: the pH value of the alkaline solution
is more than 7. The significance of pH value 7 is thai the solution is neither alkali
nor acidic: it is a neutral solution. When the value of pH is less than 7, the
solution is acidic. When the value of pH is more than 7, the solution is alkaline.

9.4.1 Measuring pH

Measurement of pH is done using a pH scale.

0123 4 5 6 7 8 ¥ 10 11 12 13 14

Fig 9.01: pH Seale.

pH Scale: Although in mathematical terms, the value of pH may be any number
from negative to positive, in reality, the value is measured on a scale of 0 to 14.

The pH ofa neutral solution is 7, You have already seen that the value of acidic
solution is less than 7 and the value of alkaline solution is more than 7.
According to the scale, the strongest acid will have a value of 0 and the strongest
alkali will have the value of 14.

Measuring System: You have already learned how to measure pH of a solution
from the molarity of its hydrogen ion. Now you will learn how to measure tt in
experiments. The process involves the universal indicator, pH paper, pH meter

etc.

Universal Indicator: Universal indicator is the mixture of various acid and
base indicators. Universal indicator turns to different colours lor different values
of pH. There is a chart of colours for different values in the Universal indicator.

£023
2025

Acid- Base Balance 22]

This is known as the Universal Indicator Colour Chart. To know the value of pH
of an unknown solution, add a few drops of the universal indicator to the solution
and then compare the colour of solution with the standard colour chart and
determine the value of pH.

pH Paper: pH Paper is used for knowing the value of an unknown solution.
Add a small piece of pH paper to the solution, it will change its colour. There is
a standard colour chart for various pH values. Compare the colour of the pH
paper with that standard colour chart and determine the value of the pH.

pH Meter: pH Meter is used for knowing the value of the pH] of an unknown
solution. Inserting the electrode of the pH meter in the unknown solution the
value of pH can be known directly from the digital display on the pH meter.

Litmus Paper: Litmus paper is the easily available cheaper alternative to know
the approximate value of pH. The litmus paper is red when the value of pH is less
than 7 and the colour is blue when the value is more than 7.

” Electrode

iy
H

Digital
colour
display
F ; ;
Fig 9.03: pl Meter. Fig 9.04: Red and Blue

Fig 9.02: pH paper and
standard Colour Chart,

Litmus Paper.
222 Chemistry

9.4.2, Importance of pH

pH has got limitless significance in terms of bio-chemical reactions in animal
bodies and use of cosmetics. They are stated below:

Agriculture: pH has a great importance in Fable Pb pH ob cater
parts of huraan body.

agriculture. Plants absorb various ions, water etc. Tae
from the soil for its own nutrition. The best value | Human body | PH

of pH of soil in this regard is 6.0-8.0. Again, ifthe | Stomach 1

value is less than 3,0 or more than 10.0, the | Human skin 4.8-5.5
beneficial microbes in the soil die. When the | Urine 6
value drops down, measured amounts of CaO is | Blood 7.43-7.45

added to the soil. On the other hand, if the value |Pancreatic juice) 8.1

of pH of the soil rises up, measured amounts of

ammonium sulfate [(NH,),50,] or ammonium phosphate [[NH,),PO,] fertilizers
are used to settle the pH of the soil.

pH in Different Bio-chemical Reactions of a Body: Various bio-chemical
reactions occur in different parts of the animal body. They require different
values of pH in various parts of the body.

Cosmetics: Human beings use different chemicals to to clean their skin,
beautification of skin, clean the hair and other actions. When the pH of skin is
4.8-5.5, the skin is acidic and that prevents attacks of microbes on the skin.
Therefore, the pH of cosmetics is maintained at 4.8-5.5,

9.5 Neutralization Reaction

We know an acid donates I‘ to an aqueous solution while a base donates OF’.
Therefore, a mixture of acid and base facilitates It and OH to produce water.
For example, in water, HC! donates IT‘ and NaOl donates OI. I’ we mix both,
the IT and OF will undergo a reaction to produce water. The negative Cl ion of
the acid and the positive Na‘ ion of the base will undergo a reaction to produce
the salt NaCl. The reaction where an acid and a base undergo a reaction to
produce salt and water is called a neutralization reaction. In this reaction both

2025
2025

Acid-Base Balance 223

acid and base lose their respective acidity and basicity to produce the neutral
substance salt and water.

HCl(aq) + NaOH(aq) ———* NaCl{aq) + H,0()
Acid Base Salt Water

Look at the above reaction. One mole hydrochloric acid neutralizes one mole
sodium hydroxide completely. Therefore, two moles of hydrochloric acid will
completely neutralize two moles of sodium hydroxide. Again, the reaction
between sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide produces sodium sulfate salt and
water.

H,S0,(aq) + 2NaOH(aqg) ————* Na,S0,{aq) + 2H,0()

Acid Base Salt Water
The above reaction shows that one mole sulfuric acid neutralizes two moles
sodium hydroxide completely. It proves, a specific amount of a specific acid will
completely neutralize a specific amount of a specific base.

9.5.1 Importance of Neutralization Reaction in Daily Life

In Digestion: Acid is secreted in the stomach for digestion. If [or some reason,
the amount of acid in the stomach increases, we feel uneasy. Generally, it
is called acidity. If this acidity continues for a long time, it creates an infection
in the stomach. We take antacid to neutralize this acidity. Antacid contains
Al(OH), and Mg(OH),, which are alkaline in nature, They neutralize the excess
acids inside our stomach,

AI(OH)s + 3HCl| ————* alcl, + 3H,0
Mg(OH); + 2HC] ———— Mec, + 2H,0

In Dental Care: If you do not clean your mouth after taking some sweets, after
sometime, you will feel a sour taste inside your mouth. Actually, there are
innumerable bacteria in our mouth which forms various organic acids from our
foods. That is why we feel the sour taste. These acids cause decay of the enamel
(calcium compound) of our teeth. Alkali present in toothpastes neutralizes these
acids and saves our denture.
224 Chemistry

In Agriculture: When plants absorb different metallic ions like Fe**, Mg**, Ca**,
kK? etc. from the soil, the soil becomes acidic. It loses fertility. Lime is used to
increase the fertility of soil which is chemically calcium oxide (CaO). This lime
neutralizes the acid in the soi! and brings back the fertility.

9.5.2 Salt

You have already learned acid and base undergo reactions to produce salt and
water. The positive ion of the salt comes from the base. That is why the positive
ion is known as the basic radical. The negative ion comes from the acid. That is
why the negative ion of the salt is called an acid radical. An aqueous solution of
salt produced from the reaction between a strong acid and a strong base is neutral
in nature. For example, aqueous solutions of NaCl, Na,SO, etc. are neutral. An
aqueous solution of salt produced in the reaction between a strong acid and a
weak base is acidic in nature. FeCl,, Zn(NO,), etc. are examples of this kind. An
aqueous solution of salt produced in the reaction between a strong base and a
weak acid is basic im nature. Na,CO,, CH,COONa (Sodium ethanoate) etc, are
examples of this kind.

9.6 Acid Rain

Oxides of non-metals undergo a reaction with water to produce various acids.
Pure air has a mixture of a small amount of carbon dioxide and different oxides
of oxygen. Animals breathe out carbon dioxide in their respiration. The
temperature of the spot where thunder strikes reaches 3000°C. At that
temperature, N, and O, present in air undergo reaction and produce NO. This NO
gets oxidized by oxygen and becomes NO,. These oxides get dissolved in the
rain water and produce some acids which come down to earth with rain water.
Rain with these acids is called acid rain.

cO(¢)+ H,00}) * 11,C0,(aq)
2NO,(g) + H,O(I) t———* HNO,(aq) + HNO,(aq)
That is why the pH value of rain water is 5-6. However, some man-made reasons

like carbon dioxide emitted from vehicles, power plants and industries mix with
air which undergoes a reaction with rain water and produces carbonic acid

fi
|
=>
oy
Acid- Base Balance 225

(H,CO,). Besides, the power plants, brick kilns etc. use coal and petroleum rich
with nitrogen and sulfur which again produce oxides of these elements. These
also produce acids which come down with rain water.

That is why, in some places, the amount of acid in rain sometimes goes higher
than expected, As a result the pH of rain water in these spots may drop down to
4 or below 4, which ts acid rain. This rain results in a drop down of pH of soil.
This has severe harmful effect on crops and plants. The pH value of water in the
water bodies also goes down and makes the situation uninhabitable for the lives
there. Fish production is hampered. Acid rain also harms the buildings, metallic
structures, marble architectures and sculptures.

9.7 Water

The other name of pure water is life. Water is polluted everyday due to bathing,
washing etc. Water becomes hard for various reasons. We can transform hard
water into mild water following various ways.

9.7.1 Hardness of Water

The source of water is rivers, canals, bils, ponds, sea and tubewell etc. Various
mineral salts are dissolved in this water. It is not easy to get foam of soap if
calcium or magnesium chloride, sulfate, carbonate or bicarbonate etc. salts are
dissolved in the water. This kind of water is called hard water. However, water
can be hard also if it has iron or manganese salts dissolved in it. Why does not
this kind of water produce foam of soap? Soap is a sodium or potassium salt of
higher organic acid. For example, sodium stearate (C, _H,.COONa) is the sodium
salt of stearic acid. It is used in soap. When we use this soap in hard water, so
long calcium or magnesium salt remains in the water, it does not produce any
foam, only the soap is decayed.

2CyjHysCOONa + CaCl, ————> (CjHssCO0),Ca + 2NaCl

Salts of magnesium and other salts also undergo the same kind of reaction. If
hard water is used in water pipes or boilers of industries, the mineral salts present
in the water gathers on the pipe as a thick layer and the water flow is obstructed.

Forima-29, Chemistry Class-9-10
226 Chemistry

In the boiler, there is wastage of heat and the boiler may even burst. The property
of water that causes the soap not to clean the dirts properly is called hardness of
Walter.

Hardness of water is of two kinds: temporary hardness and permanent hardness.

(i) Temporary hardness: Hardness of water caused by bicarbonate (HCO,)
salts of calcium, magnesium, iron ete. in water is called temporary hardness.
And this kind of water is known as temporary hard water. When heat is applied
to this kind of water, it produces insoluble carbonate salt. It gathers at the bottom
of the container as precipitate. The water can easily be separated by using a filter.
Thus the temporary hardness of water is removed and the water turns into mild

Wafer.

Ca(HCO,), — CaCO,(s)1+ CO(g)T + H,0()

(ii) Permanent hardness: Hardness of water caused by chloride or sulfate salts
of calcium, magnesium, iron etc. in water is called permanent hardness. And this
kind of water is known as permanent hard water. Mere heating does not remove
this kind of hardness. Various measures or reactions are used to remove this
hardness from water, Usually, the water of closed water body is mild water. Rain
water is also mild. It does not contain significant amounts of salts of magnesium,
calcium etc.

How to remove permanent hardness of water: Addition of sodium carbonate
to permanent hard water reacts with the calcium ion and magnesium ion and
produces precipitates of calcium carbonate and magnesium carbonate. Thus the
calcium ion and magnesium ion is removed from water and it becomes mild.

CaCly + Na,cO, ————~ CaCO,|+ 2NaCcl

9.7.2 Water Pollution and Pollution Control
Water Pollution

A major part of the bocy of animals and plants is water. That is why, all living
beings need a lot of pure water. However, water is polluted in various ways. For
example, all domestic disposals and sewage wash away to the water bodies.

20235
2025

Acid- Base Balance 227

Trashes disposed from hospitals and other places are also washed away to the
water. Fertilizers and pesticides used in agriculture also get washed into the
water bodies, Industries dump their chemical trashes, vehicles dump their fuels
which ultimately reach the water. Thus, water becomes odorous and poisonous.
Lead, cadmium, mercury, chromium etc, heavy metals mix with water from all
these trashes. These heavy metals may cause diseases, even like cancer.

Again, the human actions are not only contaminating the surface water. but also
sub-surface water. The tendency to extract excess sub surface water by shallow
pumps and too much excavation results in arsenic contamination m sub-surface
water, Arsenic is a poisonous substance. If a human being drinks too much water
contaminated with arsenic, he/she may even die.

Pollution Control

Waste treatment facilities are available in the big cities of our country, although
the number is not sufficient. Bio gas, electricity alongside organic fertilizers can
be gotten from sewage and rotten domestic disposals. The proper initiative in
this regard can reduce the environment and water pollution. Small sized bio gas
plants will utilize all this disposal and sewage and will also be of benefit to us.

Tt must be mandatory to establish effluent treatment plants (ETP) in every
industry. In no way, the industrial wastes should be disposed directly into the
open water reservoir. Everyone should be conscious about it. We should keep the
directorate of environment informed with information about this kind of offence.
We should keep n mind that organized public consciousness and public opinion
is the most effective way to prevent water pollution in our country.

9.7.3 Testing the Purity of Water

Colour and Odour Observation: Pure water is colourless, odourless and
a transparent liquid. Little amounts of mineral salt is dissolved in it. If any min-
eral salt is dissolved in it in a large amount, it can be called polluted water. In
general observation, if any odour or any suspended materials in the water or any
residue is found after filtration then the water is polluted.
228 Chemistry

Temperature of Water: In summer, the temperature of water is usually 30-35°C
with an occasional rise up to 40°C. If somehow the temperature of water rises by
a few degrees then it should be considered heat polluted. If the water used in
power plants to cool the machineries or hot water from boiler is released directly
into an open reservoir of water, the heat pollution occurs. We can detect the heat
pollution with just a thermometer.

pH Value of Water:If the pH value of water is less than 4,5 and greater than 9.5,
it will be a threat to living beings. pH can be determined by using pH paper or a
pH meter.

BOD: The elaboration of BOD is Biological Oxygen Demand. It means the
demands of bio chemical oxygen. The amount of oxygen needed to decompose
the organic matters in water in the presence of air is known as BOD of that water.
Water that has much BOD value is a polluted one.

COD: The elaboration of COD is Chemical Oxygen Demand. COD is used to
express the total chemical matter in water. The quality of the water analyzed by
measuring the extent of organic pollutants in water (specially in rivers, canals
etc.). A greater value of COD means that the extent of pollution in that water is
also greater.

BOD and COD, both are used to denote the pollution level of water. The COD
value of any water is greater than the BOD value. It happens because the
necessary amount of oxygen to decompose only the organic matters in water i5
BOD while COD is the amount of oxygen needed to decompose all organic and
inorganic matters in water,

Purification of Water

Chlorination: The easiest way of sterilization of water is chlorination. If a
certain amount of bleaching powder is added to water, the produced chlorine
oxidizes the germs and kills them. This process is called chlorination of water.
Filtering the water after adding bleaching powder makes it drinkable.

Boiling: Water can be sterihzed by boiling for 15 to 20 minutes. Noteworthy that
boiling arsenic contaminated water makes il more harm1ul.

£023
2025

Acid- Base Balance 229

Sedimentation: Adding one spoonful of alum dust [K,SO,.Al,(SO,),.24H,O] to
a bucket of water and allowing it to settle for half an hour creates
sedimentation of all impurities of water to settle at the bottom of the bucket.
Then by pouring the upper level water into another container, we get pure water.
This is the way to get tid of all insoluble pollutants from water.

Filtration: Presently filters are available in the market that helps get rid of

germs, arsenic and other pollutants from water. We get pure drinking water using
these filters.

a the acidic or alkaline nature of apple with litmus me,”

Principle: Food can be acidic, alkaline or neutral. Aqueous solution of
food that are acidic tums the blue litmus paper into red. Aqueous solution
of food that are alkaline turns the red litmus paper into blue. The litmus
paper does not change its colour when the solution is neutral.

Apparatus and Chemicals: mortar. test tube, glass rod, filter paper,
funnel, blue litmus paper, red litmus paper, distilled water, peeled apple.

Procedure:
1. Make a paste of the peeled apple in the mortar adding some water to it.
2. Take the paste in the beaker.

3. Add 10 mL distilled water in the beaker and mix the paste well, using
the glass rod.

4. Now use the filter paper and the funnel to filter the solution to get the
watery portion of it from the beaker into the test tube.

5. Observe the change of colour of the litmus papers one by one by

\ ane them in the test tube. P,

fl Observation and decision >
4Name| Probable Change of Colour in the ee nae
Food Name Linus Paver Decision
Apple Blue litmus paper turned red but the red Apple is acidic
litmus paper didn’t change
Apple _| Red litmus paper turned blue but the blue | Apple js basic
litmus paper didn’t change
Result: If you did the experiment correctly, you would find apple is acidic.

J

NN

Following the procedure stated above, if you catry out experiments with rice
and cucumber. you will see rice is a neutral food; it does not change the colour
of red litmus paper into blue or the blue into red. Cucumber is a basic food for

it turns red litmus into blue.

Preparation of pH paper

~\

Take one of the coloured vegetables (red spinach, red cabbage, beet etc.) or
coloured flower (china rose, red rose etc.). Cut it im small pieces. Boil in steam
at low temperature. Insert a piece of filter paper in the coloured extract you
obtained. Dry the paper in air and then cut it into several small pieces. That is
the pH paper you have made. To know the value of pH, sink it in a solution of
a known pH and make a colour chart of the pH range. Make pH paper with all

vegetables or flowers are available to you. Select the best one to use.

S

2025
2025

Acid Base Balance 231

1. Which of the following compounds will be produced when sulfuric acid is added
to lime stone?

a, CO, b. H,
c. O, d. SO,
2. Which of the followings is a base?
a. solt drinks b. lemon juice
c. vinegar d. washing soda

3. In the presence of which of the following aqucous solutions does ammonia gas
becomes alkaline?

a. NH,” ion b. OH ion

c. NH, d. H,O
4. The reaction between nitric acid and an unknown metal produces a colourless
solution. When we add sodium hydroxide to the solution, it produces a white

precipitate. However, excess amount of sodium hydroxide dissolves that also. The
metal is:

a. copper b, iron
c. lead d. zine
5, pH of ethanoic acid ts 4. To increase the pH we need to add-
i. ammonia solution
il. concentrated hydrochloric acid

iii. solid magnesium carbonate
232 Chemistry

Which one is correct?

a. iand ii b. i and tii

c, iand it d. i, ii and iii
6. Which of the followings makes the lime water turbid?

a NO, b. co

c 50 d. CO

1.
a. What is the colour of NO, gas? x
b. Explain whether the pH of lime water NH, Cl
will be greater or less than 7. :
os ca

c. Explain a chemical property of the
aqueous solution of gas X.
d. What will happen if gas X is passed
through HCl gas? Write the answer
with an equation.
2. The effluents produced from textile and dying industries containing paint and

sulfuric acid are dumped in nearby water reservoirs. As a result, those reservoirs
become unfit for aquatic life.

a. Which acid is found in tamarind?

b. Write down your opinion about the pH of the water reservoirs of the stem.

c. Give a logical advice to control acid pollution by effluent treatment plants in
textile and dying industries.

d. Analyze the probability of acid rain in the nearby places of textile and dying
industries along with reaction.

2025
