2025

Chapter Ten
The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government

Bangladesh government spends a lot of money to run the administration
properly, maintaining the rules and regulations within the country, protecting the
country from external attacks and running many projects for the social welfare.
The government has to earn revenue from different sources to finance these
costs. A budget is the financial plan and a list of all planned expenses and
revenues of the government. And these things are discussed in Public Finance.

Racreatiny  indstlal & OPERATING & DEVELOPMENT
Colne Eeowomic BUDGET; 2021-2022
Religious Afiaire SEM" wigectiansvug (TAKA. 6,03,681 BILLION)
OBS “4 Bypenditane Use of Resources

Housing
Public Order &
Security
Bee
Social Security
& Welfice mero
5.7 :
Transpo &
Communication
Public 114%,
A 7 an Lacal Gave, &

Defence rieulnare
6.2% ae ct

Health
5at

Sectorwise Resource Distribution (including Subsidies & Incentives and Pension)

After studying this chapter, we will be able to-
* explain what public finance is;
* explain what the sources of government revenue are;
« explain what the sectors of government expenditure are:
* explain the concept of budget:
e differentiate between current budget and capital budget,
* compare between balanced budget and unbalanced budget;
* explain the budget of Bangladesh government and its classifications;

* identify the sources to finance the development budget of Bangladesh
government and
* participate in the discussion of the national budget.
156 Econonucs

10.1 Public Finance

The branch of economics, in which the revenue and expenditure of the
government and things related to loans are discussed, is called the public
finance. Public finance discusses in which sectors, how and following what
principles the local government will spend for ensuring the maximum social
welfare and the economic development of the people. How much and from
which sectors it will earn revenues to finance public expenditures, or from
where it will borrow are discussed in public finance.

10.2 The Sources of Revenue of Bangladesh Government

Bangladesh is alow middle income developing country. The government has
to spend a lot of money for socio-economic development, public welfare,
running the administration and maintaining the country's defense system. To
finance these expenditures, the government has to collect revenues from
different sectors. The government of Bangladesh has two main sources of
revenue. For example: a) tax revenue b) non-tax revenue.

a) Tax Revenue

Tax is the revenue which the government
compulsorily collects from the public and for
which the public cannot demand any direct
benefit from the government. The tax,
which is imposed on the residents of the
country or the non-residents of the country,
on different industrial companies and on
the products is called the tax revenue.

The sources of government revenues are:

Board of Revenue

1. Taxes on Income and Profit

The tax that is imposed on the personal income of a person is called the income
tax. One of the main sources of the revenue of Bangladesh government is
income tax. At present, except company people whose annual net income is Tk.
3,00,000 (for male); Tk. 3,50,000 (for female and male whose age is above 65
years); Tk. 4,00,000 (for disabled); and Tk. 4,75,000 (for freedom fighters) taxes
are Imposed on their income. Moreover, taxes are also imposed on the profits of

the different enterprises.

2023
2025

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 157

2. Value Added Tax (VAT)

Bangladesh, like other developed and developing countries, started the system
of value added tax from the year 1991-92. In the case of production, there exist
a lot of stages from producing the raw material to the final product. In the
case of this production process, the tax that is imposed at a certain rate on the
value added to different stages of production, is called the value added tax
(VAT). Recently, in our country value added tax has been imposed on
imported goods and locally produced goods and different service sectors. In
future, the areas of the value added tax will be expanded.

3. Customs Duties
One of the major sources of income of Bangladesh government is custom

duties. The tax imposed on imported goods and services is called the customs
duties.

4, Excise Duties

The tax imposed on domestically produced and used goods is called excise
duties. Excise duties are imposed to earn the revenue and also to reduce the
consumption of harmful goods. In Bangladesh excise duty is mainly imposed
on the goods such as tea, cigarette, sugar, tobacco, kerosene, medicine, spirit,
matches etc.

5. Supplementary Duties

For many reasons the government imposes extra lax on some goods even
after imposing the excise duty or the value added tax orthe customs duty.
This extra duty is called the supplementary duty, e.g. supplementary duties
imposed on ceramic tiles.

6. Other Taxes and Duties

Other than the five taxes and duties discussed above, the government collects
some extra taxes and duties. For example, wealth tax, taxes on petrol and
gases, taxes on visiting a foreign country, vacation tax, etc.
158 Economics

7, Narcotics and Liquor Duty

The government earns revenue from imposing duty on narcotics and liquor.
By doing this the government earns revenue as well as increases the social
welfare.

8. Tax on Vehicles

The taxes given for various yehicles are called the vehicle tax. The
government earns revenue from this sector every year.

9, Land Development Tax

The tax that is paid by the land owner to the government for owning and using
the land is called the land revenue. Bangladesh government has imposed
development tax on land.

10. Non-Judicial Stamp

Non-judicial stamps are used on wills and the application forms of the cases.
The government earns a lot of revenue from this sector every year.

b. Non-Tax Revenue

The government earns a lot of revenue other than taxes and duties. Revenue
collected from these sources is called non-tax revenue. The sources of non-tax
revenue of the government are:

1. Dividend and Profit

The government gets dividend and profit at the end of the year from its
organizations such as insurance companies, non-financial organizations (for
example, nationalized industries, parks. zoos, etc.).

2. Interest

The government gives loan to the public service holders, and many financial

and self-governing organizations. So it earns some revenue as the interest of
those loans.

2025
2025

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 159

3. Administrative Fee

The government earns different types of fees from the public for grvmg them
administrative services such as court fees.

4. Fine, Penalty and Confiscation

The government collects some revenue through fine, penalty and confiscation
from those who commit misdeeds that are against the rules and regulations of the
country.

5, Economic Services

The government gives services to the people through its various organizations.
Among these services the important ones are: the fees received from
import-export as per law, the registration fees from commercial organizations
and companies, income under insurance law and audit fees from co-operative
societies registration and renewal fees from co-operative societies, etc.

6. Rent and Lease

By giving public property on rent and lease, the government earns a loi of
revenue each year, e.g. lease on a haat.

7. Toll and Levy

The government also collects revenue through toll and levy imposed on various
bridges.

8. Non-Business Sales

Sometimes the government sells products without any profit for the wellbeing
of the people, e.g. open-market sale (OMS).

9. Railway

Bangladesh railway ears money through the services of transportation of
public and products. The profit in this sector has increased due to the
expansion and modernization of railway service.
160 Economics

10. Postal Department

Bangladesh postal department is run by Bangladesh government. For this reason
it is a revenue source of the government. This department gives varieties of
services, thus its income has slightly increased.

The revenue sources of the government mentioned above are not enough
to finance its expenditures. For this reason, the government has to depend on
foreign loans, aids, grants.

Task: Make a list of revenue sources of Bangladesh government.

| Task: Find out the ways of increasing revenue sources of Bangladesh government. _|

10.3 The Sectors of Expenditures of Bangladesh Government

Bangladesh 1s a low income people’s welfare state. For socio-economic
development, human resource development, poverty reduction, protecting the
country from external forces and running it and for the wellbeing of the people,
the government has to pay a lot of money every year. The field of work of the
government has increased with the growth and development of democracy. For
this reason many new sectors have been included in the heads of the
expenditures of the government.

The main heads of expenditures of Bangladesh government
1) Education and Technology

For developing human resources the government has to pay a lot of money for
the expansion of primary education, quality development, and expansion of
technical and vocational education, development of female education,
increasing the number and amount of scholarship to encourage the students and
increasing tertiary education. The government spends a good amount of money
on information and technology to develop the socio-economic condition by
using technology in education.

20125
The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 161

2. Defense

To protect the country from external forces,
the government has to spend a huge amount
of money to buy weapons for wars, to
provide proper training, salary, shelter and
treatment to the people of defense. Some
expenditure in this sector remains hidden for
the national safety.

Navyal-craft

3. Public Administration

To rule the country the government has to
accomplish the work related to public
administration. It has to spend a great
amount of money for the people working in
the administration for their salary and bonus,
and for running the office.

Bangladesh Secretariat Building
4. Public Control and Protection

For maintaining internal peace and discipline and for ensuring safety for
people’s life and property, the government has to spend a lot of money to create
and maintain police and paramilitary forces, and to give them training and others
facilities.

5. Agriculture, Agro-based Industry and
Agricultural Research

The government has been gradually increasing the
allocation of subsidy on agriculture and loan to
enhance and develop the agriculture and agro-based
industries. Bangladesh government has started to
contribute to the agricultural research since Onancial
years 2007-08.

Agriculture

Forma-21, Economics Class 9-10
162 Economics

6. Public Health
To ensure public health, the government has to establish hospitals and medical

colleges, give free medicines, prevent plague, train the doctors and nurses, etc.
and so it has to incur a great expenditure in this sector. To ensure the health
services in the rural areas health complexes have been built and one M.B.B.S
doctor and a health instructor have been appointed. For this reason, the
expenditure has increased.

7. Social Security and Welfare

Bangladesh government spends as per its ability a lot of money for social
security for the livelihood of the helpless and destitutes such as providing
allowances for elderly people and widows, rehabilitation of the acid-victim
women and challenged people, national honour allowances for the freedom
fighters, allowances for the reduction of unemployment caused by natural and
geographical reasons, providing fund for the skills development of the
readymade garments employees and the homeless, for one-hundred-day work
programmes, for Ekti Bari Ekti Khamar and for rationing for the destitute
people.

5. Electricity and Fuel

To meet the increasing demand for electricity the =
government spends a lot of money to produce and — fK
distribute more electricity, to make fund for the renewable
energy and in many other sectors.

9, Transport and Communication Electricity Supply

To develop the transport and communications system in Bangladesh the
government spends a lot of money through the different projects of the
ministries of communication like road, railway, navy, private airways and
tourism, postal and telecommunication department.

10. Poverty Alleviation and Employment

Our current government has started to give various kinds of technical training to
the poorly educated and physically powerful unemployed youths in different

2023
2025

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 163

districts for two years through the "National Service’ project to solve the
unemployment problem. It distributes more than 10 lakh metric ton of food
grain through the projects of T.R, G.R, B.G.F, and V.G.D. The government has
given small loans in favour of different ministries for the creation of
employment for the poor people. The government has to spend a lot of money in
these sectors.

11. Repaying the Loan and Interest

The government takes a lot of money as loan from both the domestic and foreign
sources to finance its development projects. So it has to pay a huge amount of
money to repay these loans and the interests of these loans.

12. Industrial and Economical Services

For the development of the country's various
industrial and economic service sectors, the
government spends a lot of money. It spends money
through the ministries of industry, business, labor
and employment and the ministry of expatriates. To
distribute loans to the small entrepreneurs for small
and moderate industry sectors, Bangladesh Bank has
drawn up a reinvestment plan by encouraging banks
and financial institutions.

13. Environment and Forestry Garments Industry

Protecting the environment and increasing its standard, saving it from industrial
pollution, establishing refinery for industries that produce liquid wastage, etc.
cause a huge expenditure to the government and it spends this money through
ministry of forestry.

14. Entertainment, Culture and Religion

Every year government spends a lot of money on information, culture, religion
and youth and sports development.
164 Economics

15. Local Government and Rural Development

To run the local government division, rural development and co-operative
divisions and Chittagong Mill Tracts ministry. Bangladesh government spends a

lot of money.

Other than the above sectors, Bangladesh government also spends money on
women and children, water resources, fisheries and animal resources, housing,
food and disaster management. According to the government statement, the
government of Bangladesh spends revenue on non-development expenditures in
55 sectors and under the development projects nearly in 18 sectors. In the light
of modern social welfare, the government should spend more on development
projects and reduce expenditures on non-development projects.

Source: Finance Department, Finance Ministry.

Task: Make a list of the allocations of funds for expenditures sector wise made
by Bangladesh government.

Task: Find out the reasons for increasing expenditures of Bangladesh government in
recent years.

10.4 Budget

The planned estimate of incomes and expenditures is called a budget. If a person
designs systematically the incomes they get from different sources and how they
spend them. it is called the personal budget. In the same way, the
government's revenue of a particular year, how much revenue it expects from
different sources and how much it wants to spend in different sectors, is called
the government budget. The fiscal year of Bangladesh is from July to June.

The budget is the main instrument of the economic system. It shows the political
view of the government and also the economic condition of a country. It not only
reflects the actual calculation of the income and expenditure but also the
systematic plan of the income and expenditure of the government. It also lists
the way how the deficit will be tackled if expenditure is more than income and
the way of using the surplus money if income is more than expenditure. When
the budget is reacy it has to be passed in parliament and with the permission of
the president the new fiscal year starts according to the new budget.

2023
2025

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 165

Types of budget
According to the types of income-expenditure of the government the budget is mainly

of two types:
Budget |

|
Current Budget Capital Budget

Current Budget

The budget which shows the current income and current expenditure of the
government, is called the current budget. Current income is collected from tax
and non-tax revenue. Value added tax, income tax, wealth tax, land tax. etc. are
important in tax revenue. The dividend and protit of various companies and
interest on loans are the main sources of non-tax revenue. The income from this
budget is used to finance the expenditures of the administrative jobs properly
and for national defense. Main expenditure sectors of this budget are education,
public administration, police department, health and family planning etc. Since
these sectors remain unchanged, reallocation in these sectors every year is
required. Usually there is always surplus in the current budget. Its called non-
development or revenue budget also.

Capital Budget

The budget which shows the capital income and expenditure of the government
is called the capital budget. The main purpose of this budget is the
socio-economic development. For this reason the government plans a yearly
development program and collects revenue from various domestic and
international sources to finance it and to put it in action, The sources of income
from the country are surplus revenue, private savings and charging extra tax ete.
and the sources of income from outside the country are foreign loans, grants etc.
Under the annual development programs, agriculture, industry, electricity and
fuel, woman and youth development, transport and communications, rural
development, housing, ete. are important. The main purpose of this budget is to
attain economic development and growth.

Task: Differentiate between current budget and capital budget.

166 Economics

According to the balance between income and expenditure, the budget is
mainly of two types:

| Balanced Budget | | Unbalanced Budget |
: ,

Surplus Budget Deficit Budget

1. Balanced Budget

At a certain time, if the expected income and expected expenditure of the
government are equal, it is called the balanced budget. In this budget if
expenditure is coordinated with the income, there is a less possibility of inflation
or rise in price level and thus there is stability in the economy. But in a
developing country like ours, this type of budget is not helpful to reduce
unemployment problems, develop the economy and to fight the emergency
situations.

Formula: Balanced Budget = Total Income - Total Expenditure = 0
Therefore, Total Income = Total Expenditure

2. Unbalanced Budget

At a certain time if the expected income of the government is not equal to its
expected expenditure, it is called the unbalanced budget. There are two types of
unbalanced budget according to the inequality of income and expenditure of the
government.

a) Surplus budget
b) Deficit budget

a) Surplus Budget
In a fiscal year if the expected expenditure of the government is less than its
expected revenue, itis called the surplus budget.

2025
2025

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 167

That is, in this budget income is more than expenditure.
Formula: Surplus Budget = (Total Income - Total Expenditure) > 0
Therefore, Total Income > Total Expenditure

b) Deficit Budget

In a fiseal year if the expected expenditure of the government is more than its
expected revenue, it is called the deficit budget. To cope with deficit the
government borrows money from the public, creates new money, borrows
money from the central bank, takes foreign loans and grants.

This type of budget is useful for developing countries like ours for the efficient
allocation of resources, for the increase in employment, per capita income and
for raising the level of standard of living of the people. But the creation of new
money may cause the rise in price level and inequality in income.

Formula: Deficit Budget = (Total Income - Total Expenditure) < 0
Therefore, Total Income < Total Expenditure

| Task: Write down the differences between surplus budget and deficit budget.

| Task: Write down the differences between balanced budget and unbalanced budget. |

10.5. Bangladesh Government Budget

Bangladesh is a developing country. The
fiscal year of this country is July-June. Every
year in the first week of June the finance
minister presents primary budget in the
parliament, which is finalized after being
discussed, criticized and changed if it is
required and then passed in that very month in
the parliament.

Jatiya Sangsad

In our country the budget is represented in two parts.
a) Non-development budget or current or revenue budget
b) Development budget or capital budget
168
a) Non-Development Budget

The part of the budget in which the
government's regular income-expenditure is
shown and the expenditures are not directly
involved in the development is called the
non-deyelopment budget. The main
purpose of this budget is to maintain the
country’s defense system and to conduct
the economy properly. Economical plans
are not part of this budget.

Economics

amc
‘ail OPERATING BUPGET: 2321-2025)
ele Daa A a, AE amas

riety
Lay

The income of Non-Developmental budget is collected from Revenue from the
Tax and Non-Tax Revenue, which are as follows:

Revenue from Tax

Non-Tax Revenue

Tax on income and profit
Value added tax

Custom duty

Excise duty
Supplementary duty
Land tax

Tax on vehicles

Tax on selling stamps
Narcotics and liquor duty
Other taxes and duties

Dividend and profit from states owned enterprises

Interest

Administrative fees

Fine, penalty and confiscation
Revenue from various services
Rent and lease

Toll and levy

Railway

Postal department

Wire and telephone department
Other non-tax revenue

Expenditure sectors of non-development budget

Education and technology
Public administration
Defense

Public control and protection
Transport and communication

Social security

Repaying loan and interest

Health and family planning
Entertainment, culture and religion
Unexpected expenditure

20125
The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 169

b) Development Budget

The part of the budget which shows

. " Development Badges 2919-2024)
the income-expenditure of the faci ily qr, _ (TAKA237,079 BILLION)
development projects is called the & Welfare | aaa

development budget. It shows the pup.

details of the government's annual ronan

a En &
development projects and the sources Berti
of expected income and expenditure. is
The main purpose of this budget is to SN tamporation
5 ‘ Caommuneration
achieve economic development and <i 25.8%
. Locel goverment
growth in a planned way. For this & sural development
5.0%, 15.1%

reason, itis necessary to draw up new =~ 19.7%

projects every year.

Revenue sources and expenditure sectors of development budget

Revenue sources Expenditure sectors

Internal sources: | Agriculture and industrial development

1. Surplus of non-development budget | 2. Local government and rural development

2, Revenue from charging extra tax 3, Transport and communications development
3. Loan from internal banking system | 4. Electricity and fuel

4. Borrowing through bonds 5. Education and technology development

6. Water resource and flood control

External sources:

: 7, Housing
1, Foreign grants

> Foreign | &. Labor and human power
2. Foreign loans
9. Woman and youth development

10. others

Task: Identify which part of the budget of Bangladesh government is in the non-

development sector and which is in the development sector.

Forma-22, Economics Class 9-10
170 Economics

10.6 At a glance the budget of year 2021-2022 and Revised budget
2020-2021 of Bangladesh government

Budget at a glance (Taka in crore)

Description Budget 2021-2022 |, deot 2020-202 i

a. NBR Tax revenue 3,46,000 3,16,000
b, Non NBR Tax revenue 43,000 35,532
c. Non-tax revenue 3.490 3,985
Total Tax Revenue: (at+btc) 3,92,490 3,55,517
a) Non-development revenue expenditure 3,61,500 323,688
b} Development expenditure 2,357,078 208,028
b) Other expenditure 5,103 7,270
Total expenditure: (a+b) 6,03,681 5,38.983
Total Budget Deficit -2,11,191 -1,83,466
Financing

a) External sources 97,738 68.414
b) Domestic sourees 1,13,453 1,135,052
Total Financing: (a+b) 2,11,191 1,83,466

Source: MOF (Finance Division) Government of Bangladesh budget-2021-2022

There are mainly two parts in this budget. For example, non-development
budget and development budget. According to the balance between revenue and
expenditure, the budget of Bangladesh government for the year 2021-2022 is
a deficit budget.

Task: Give your opinion about the funding of the development budget of Bangladesh.

[The Source of all information of this chapter: Bangladesh Economic Review 2020.)

2025
2025

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government

Exercise
Short Questions

What is public finance?
What do you mean by value added tax?
What is meant by budget?

a —

td

4. What do you mean by current budget and capital budget?

Descriptive Questions

1. Explain the revenue sources of Bangladesh government.

171

2. Explain the expenditure sectors of Bangladesh government.

3. What is budget? Explain the types of budget according to the pattern of revenue-

expenditure of the government.

Multiple-Choice Questions

1. Income tax is imposed on
a) personal income.
¢}) income from the vehicles.

2. awn
wwsen,\, oratinar (x0)
¥

b

b) income of the company.
d) income from the land tax.

ro}

Railway

/
Administration, Toll, i Lev Railwa fda
Rent & vey \ sc \paree/
fon, A Figure: B Figure ; C Figure ; D
Which figure has the non-tax revenue sources?
a) figure-A b)  figure-B
c) figure-C d) figure-D
Read the following table and answer questions 3 and 4.
Budget of the governments of two countries in a fiscal year:
Country-A Country-B
Expected Expected Expected Expected
Income (taka) | Expenditure (taka) Income (dollar) | Expenditure (dollar)
L000 crore 1100 crore 20 lakh billion 20 lakh billion

172 Economics

3. Which kind of budget does country-B have?
a) balanced b) unbalanced cc) deficit d) surplus

4, Due to the budget of country-A

i) natural resources will be completely utilized.

ii) the standard of living will be increased.

iii) there is a possibility of increase of the price of goods quickly.
Which of the following is correct?

a iandi ob iandii c. tiandiit d. i,tiandit

Creative Questions

1. Ishrat goes shopping in a departmental store. She has to pay more than the
actual price. When she asks the salesman about this, he replies, "It is charged
by the government upon sales from the customer."

a) What is land tax?

b) Explain supplementary tax?

c) Which revenue source of the government is the extra tax charged
from Ishrat part of?

d) Compare excise tax with the tax given by Ishrat.

2. Jahid studies in a school. Everyone in their school is happy because a new
building is being constructed, He finds out that this year the government
has sponsored a big budget for their school. He does not know what budget

is. $0 he asks his teacher and the teacher tells him that this is also

an expenditure of the government like their salary, which is also provided

through the budget.

a) Give a definition of budget.

b) What do you mean by public finance?

c) Which budget of the government provides funds for the construction of
Jahid’s school building? Explain.

d) The budget of Jahid’s school will help the overall development of the
country. Analyse.

The End

2025
