Chapter Five
Atmosphere

Earth is the only habitable planet in the solar system, The mixture of gases
surrounding the Earth or other celestial body, held in place by gravity is the
atmosphere where living things survive. Its thickness is about 10,000 kilometres.
However, about 97 percent of the total atmosphere remains within 30 kilometres
upward from the earth's surface. It forms distinct lavers at different heights. The
Earth's atmosphere consists, in ascending order, of the troposphere (containing
90 percent of the atrnosphere’'s mass), the stratosphere, the mesosphere. the
thermosphere, and the exosphere. The atmosphere is composed primarily of nitrogen
(78 percent) and oxygen (21 percent) and plays a major role in the water cycle. A
unit of pressure is equal to the pressure of the air at sea level, about 14.7 pounds per
square inch, or 1,013 millibars. In this chapter we would like to know how this
atmosphere is important for the living things for their survival. A diagram shows
the layers of the atmosphere in the earth.

Ozone layer

The Atmosphere

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to—
* explain the elements of the air;
* explain the layers of atmosphere and their characteristics:
* explain the importance and analyze the different layers of the atmosphere;
® discuss the difference between weather and climate:

* explain the factors of climate:

2025
2025

Atmosphere 71

* analyze the wind circulation and their impact;

e« explain the water cycle;

« discuss different types of rainfall;

e discuss the inter-relationship of global warming and climate change;

* analyze global climatic change and its impact on different regions of the
world;

*« analyze the impact of climatic change on the people of Bangladesh in their
living condition and economic activities and the environment.

Composition of the atmosphere

The Atmosphere is very important part of the biosphere. It is vital for life on earth.
Without the atmosphere life would not be possible. It gives us air to breathe and also
protects us from the ultraviolet rays of sun. It absorbs heat so that temperatures on
earth are such that life becomes possible. It separates the earth from the space Air
ig made almost entirely of two gases. The most common gas is nitrogen (N>). and
the second most common gas is oxygen (O)). Nitrogen and oxygen together make up
99 percent of the planet's atmosphere. All other gases together make up the remaining
1 percent, Although each of these trace gases is only found in tiny quantities, many
such as ozone, serve Important roles for the planet and its life. One very important
minor gas is carbon dioxide (CO,), which is essential for photosynthesis and is also a
very important greenhouse gas.

In nature, air is never completely dry, Up to 4 percent of the volume of air can be
water vapour, Humidity is the amount of water vapour in air. The humidity of the
air varies from place to place and season to season.

Argon, neon, helium, xenon, and krypton are noble gases. They are colourless,
odorless, tasteless, and they do not become part of ordinary chemical reactions
because they are chemically mert. The noble gases simply exist in the atmosphere,

Particles of dust, soil, metals, salt, smoke, ash and other solids make up a small
percentage of the atmosphere (Table 1) which are not gas.
72 Geography and Environment

Table 1 : List of elements in the atmosphere

Name of the Elements Percentage
Nitrogen (N>) 78.02
Oxygen (03) 20.71
Argon (Ar) 0.80
Carbon dioxide (CO3) 0.03
Other Gases (neon, helium, krypton, xenon, ozone, methane and 0.02
nitrous oxide)
Water vapour 0.41
Dust and particle 0.01
Total 100.00

AtmosphericLayers and it Characteristics

The atmesphere can be divided vertically into five divisions according to the
characteristics such as temperature. pressure and density. These layers are :
‘Troposphere, Stratosphere, Mesosphere, Thermosphere and Exosphere (fig. 3.1).

Troposphere

This is the first layer of the atmosphere close to the earth’s surface. Clouds, rainfall,
thunderballs, wind, storms, fogs, dews, snowfalls everything is created in this layer.
The last terminal of Troposphere is called Tropopause. It extends to a height of 16-19
kilometres at the equator and 8 kilometres in the polar region. The characteristics of the
Troposphete are :

(a) In this layer temperature and density of air decreases with the increase of height.
As the density of air is thin, the absorption capacity of heat is less. Generally
in every 1,000 metres of height temperature decreases 6.5¢/TKM

(b) Velocity of the wind increases with ihe increase of height .

(c) Troposphere contains most of the water vapour, clouds form in this layer.

(d) The presence of cust particle in this layer makes the heaviest layer of the
atmosphere and 75 percent of the weight of the atmosphere remains in this layer.

(e) The height at which the temperature stops decreasing is called the Tropopause.
Here the temperature may be as low as —54° Celsius.

2025
Atmosphere 73

Stratosphere

This is the second layer of the atmosphere which extends from the tropopause to
about 50 lolometres above the surface ofthe Earth. The characterishcs of the
Stratosphere are :

(a) Temperature increases due to the absorption of the ultraviolet radiation of the Sun,

due to the presence of ozone, in this layer. The temperature slowly increases up to
4° Celsius.

(b) This layer is free from clouds and associated with weather phenomena. So, it is
an ideal flying condition for large jet planes.
(c) At about 50 kilometres the temperature begins to fall again. This marks the end

of the Stratosphere, The end of the Stratosphere is called the Stratopause. This
layer is between Stratosphere and Mesosphere.

Mesosphere

The Mesosphere extends to a height of 80 kilometres. The characteristics
of the Mesosphere are :

(a) In this layer temperature decreases again, falling as low as -§3° Celsius. The
Mesosphere has the coldest temperatures in the atmosphere.

(b) The meteor that comes from the outer space to the earth burns down in this layer.
(c) The end of this layer is known as the Mesopause.

Thermosphere

The Thermosphere lies above the Mesosphere.The characteristics of the Thermosphere
are =

(a) In this layer temperature rises considerably, reaching up to 1480° Celsius.

(b) The increase in temperature is due to the fact that the gas molecules in this layer
absorb the x-rays and the shortwave ultraviolet radiation of the Sum. These result
in the break-up of the gas molecules into positively and negatively charged
particles. These electrically charged particles are known as ions. The process
by which molecules of certain substances are electrically charged is known as
ionization,

(c) The electrically charged gas molecules of the Thermosphere reflect radio waves
from the Earth back into space which helps in long distance communication.
This layer is also known as Ionosphere.

Forma-10, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
74 Geography and Environment

(d) Different radio wave sent from the earth return to earth again by facing obstacle by
lonsphere.

Astronomical 5
Exosphere

=—hH etrosphere——>

cose AO,O0G Kilgmattes tee-- ep eeeeeeeeeeeee

+ BO Kilometres +++:

Fig. $.1 : Atmospheric layers
Exosphere

This layer lies above the Thermosphere. The characteristics of the Exosphere are :

(a) The Exosphere extends beyond the Thermosphere up to 960 kilometres. It
eradually merges with interplanetary space.

(b) The temperature in this layer range from about 300°-1650° Celsius.

(c) This layer contains only traces of gas like oxygen, nitrogen, argon and helium
as it lacks the gravity which allows the gas molecules to easily escape into space.

Task : Write down the characteristics of layers of atmosphere in the table (in groups).

Troposphere| Stratosphere Mesosphere Thermosphere Exosphere

2025
2025

Atmosphere 75

Importance of Different Layers of Atmosphere

« Sound waves cannot travel without the Atmosphere. Radio waves sent from the

Earth's surface is reflected back to the Earth as it is obstructed in the Ionosphere
layer.

e Weather condition like rainfall. snowfall, cloud, fog. dew and hailstorm
would not develop without the Troposphere layer. Rainfall is important for
the croplands and forests.

* The Earth is saved from the meteors as they are destroyed in atmospheric layers.

e If there was no atmosphere there would be no life, it would be a desert
like environment of moon.

Definition of weather and climate

The daily average condition of temperature, pressure, wind, humidity and precipitation
for a place is known as weather, Generally, climate is the average condition of the weather
for 30 to 40 years.

Elements of weather and climate are wind pressure, temperature, wind pattern,
humidity and precipitation.

Factors of climate

Climate is not same in the world. Some regions are hot and some are cold, some are
wet and some are deserts. Due to geographical location, the climate varies.
Factors of climate is discussed below :

1. Latitude : Sun's ray varies with the latitude. The Sun ray falls vertically on the
equator and as a result the temperature is high im the equtorial region. In higher
latitudes inclined sun rays decreases the temperature. Generally, the atmospheric
temperature decreases from the equator towards the poles.

2. Altitude : The atmospheric temperature decreases with the increase of altitude
from the sea level. With the increase of every 1,000 metres of altitude, the
temperature decreases 66°" Celsius. If two places are situated on the same latitude,
their climate will vary due to the difference of altitude. Even though Dinajpur and
Shillong are located in the same latitude, but the climate varies due to altitude. The
temperature in Shillong is much lower than Dinajpur.
76 Geography and Environment

3. Distance from the sea: Location of the land mass sometime makes a mild climate.
Cox’s Bazar, Chittagong, Patuakhali located m the coastal area are milder in climate
than Rajshahi. In the coastal area there is equable temperature where the difference
between summer and winter is very less. Bul regions located far away [Irom the sea
have extreme climate with very hot summer and very cold winter, Land mass get
warmer quickly than water bodies and radiates heat rapidly. So. during summer
inland continental areas become warmer rapidly and in winter becomes very cold.This
type of climate is known as continental or extreme climate,

4. Wind movement : Wind movement plays an important role on the climate of an
area. If water vapour is saturated wind blows and abundant rainfall occurs in
that area. During monsoon season the wind blows from the Bay of Bengal saturated
with water vapour which causes heavy rainfall all over Bangladesh. In winter the
opposite occurs as the wind blows {rom inland, the continental air is dry and there is
no rainfall and the temperature decreases,

§. Ocean currents : The air of the coastal area becomes either cold or warm due
to the influence of cold or warm ocean currents. It may be mentioned that the south
-eastern coast of the United States of America has higher temperature due to the
influence of the Warm Gulf Stream, again the cold Labrador Current keeps the
temperature low in the eastern coast of North America,

6. Location of the mountains : Wind movement, when obstructed by the high
mountains can influence the climate. The monsoon air is obstructed by the
Himalayas in the north,which brings heavy rainfall im Bangladesh, India and Nepal.
During winter the cold airmass of Central Asia cannot cross the Himalayas and so
the climate of the sub-continent (India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka) never
gets cold like Europe.

7. Slope of the land: The air and the land become warm where the sun’s rays fall
directly on the slopes of the highlands. But in the opposite side of the slope, the air
remains cold due to the inclined sun rays or meager sunshine.

5. Composition of the soil : The structure of the soil or texture plays a vital role
in the conservation of temperatures. Exposed sandy soil becomes hot and cold
quickly. But the alluvial soil and the clayey soil take much time to get warm or cold

due to heat conservation of the soil,

2025
2025

Atmosphere 77

9. Location of the forest :The vegetation from its evapo-transpiration activity helps
air to saturate with water vapour. This saturated air condenses and rainfall occurs.
The intensity of storms and cyclones are reduced due to the forest. The air of the dense
forest remains cold as the sun rays cannot penctrate into the soil.

Task : What factors of climate is influencing the climate of Bangladesh? Explain
it by brain storming in a group. Each group will be given 15 minutes time
to finish the work and the whole group will make a 10 minutes presentation
on the topic.

Hydrological cycle

The interchange of the different states of water between the ocean, land and air is

called the Water Cycle or Hydrologic Cycle. Evaporation, condensation and
precipitation are the three physical processes involved in the hydrologic cycle.

Water evaporates due to the heat of the Sun. The oceans provide nearly 90 percent
of the moisture in the atmosphere. Moisture also evaporates from rivers, lakes and
other water bodies. The rest of the moisture is given out by plants by a process known
a8 Wanspiralion.

The water vapour m the air condenses into clouds. Winds blowing from the ocean
transport the water vapour. This condensed water vapour is given out as rain and
snow mainly over land. Some of this precipitation that falls is absorbed by plants

and soil. The rest of it runs into rivers or seeps into underground streams. This is
known as surface run off.

From the land, water makes its way back to the sea,and the cycle begins again (fig. 5.2).

(1) Evaporation : Evaporation occurs at all temperatures. Towever, evaporation is
more fapid at higher temperatures, Al lower temperatures, it takes place slowly.
The rate of evaporation is directly related to the temperature of air. When the
temperature increases, the rate of evaporation also increases.

Warm air can hold more water vapour than cold air, When the temperature of air
increases, the capacity of air to hold water vapour increases. However. there is a

limit on how much water vapour the air can hold at any given temperature.
78 Geography and Environment

(2) Condensation : Condensation is the process by which water vapour is converted
into water, Condensation can only occur when the air becomes saturated,

Condensation Pr

IMT

Transpiration

a

Condensation
(Clouds form)

\

Run off
4 Evaporation

Fig. 5.2: Water cycle

Air can become saturated in two ways |

1. By cooling of air : When the temperature of air decreases, its capacity to hold
water decreases. The air can become saturated with the same quantity of water
vapour by a fall in temperature.

2. By the addition of more water vapour : When more evaporation occurs. the

air can become saturated in nature, Saturation of air in this manner is nota very
common occurrence,

When the air becomes saturated, it cannot hold water any more. Any extra water
that may be present. is given out in the form of droplets of water. These condensed
droplets are very small and may be seen in different forms.

Different forms of condensation
1. Cloud : Droplets of water suspended in the sky is called Cloud.

2. Mist : Droplets of water suspended near to the surface of the earth is called Mist.
3. Fog: A dense mist is called Fog.

4, Dew : Tiny drops of water are formed when water vapour condenses an the ground
or cool surfaces is called Dew.

2025
2025

Atmosphere 79

§. Frost : It is the coating of ice left when moisture in the air freezes or dew freezes
into ice is called Frost.

Saturation and dew point

The temperature at which the air gets saturated is known as dew point.

When the air is holding the maximum amount of water it can hold, the air is said
to be saturated.

The amount of water needed to saturate the air changes with temperature since the
capacity of air to hold water is related to the temperature.

When the temperature is high. more water will be needed to saturate the air.
Al low temperatures a smaller quantity of water would be enough to saturate il.

Humidity : Humidity refers to the amount of water vapour present in the alr.
Amount of water vapour in the atmosphere is less than 1 percent. The air which
contains no water vapour is called Dry air and the air which contains. more water
vapour is called Humid air. Humid air contains 2%-5% water vapour. The amount
of water vapour is measured with hygrometer. Humidity in the air is expressed
in two ways : by Absolute humidity and Relative humidity,

Absolute humidity : It refers to the total amount of water vapour present in a given
volume of air,

Relative humidity : Relative humidity is a ratio between the actual amount of water
vapour present in the air and the maximum amount of water the air can hold ata
given temperature.

(3) Precipitation : A form of water, such as rain, snow, or sleet, thal condenses
from the atmosphere, becomes too heavy to remain suspended, and falls to the Earth's
surface by the action of gravity, Different atmospheric conditions are responsible for
the different forms of precipitation,

Types of condensation
» Clouds

« Fog

« Dew and White Frost
a0 Geography and Environment

Condensation
* Condensation occurs when water vapour changes to a liquid.

* For condensation to lake place, the ai must be saturated and there must be a
surface on which the vapour can condense.

* In the air above the ground, tiny water-absorbent particles known as condensation
nuclei serve as the surfaces on which water vapour can condense.

Fog

Fog, generally considered an atmospheric hazard, is a cloud with its base at or very
near the ground, Foes is formed in cold weather.

Dew and white frost

* Dew is the condensation of water vapour on objects that have radiated sufficient
heat to lower their temperature below the dew point of the surrounding air.

® White frost forms when the dew point of the air is below [reezing.

Forms of precipitation

Rain : Precipitation that reaches the ground in liquid form is called ram. Ram drops
are 0.5 milimetres to 6.35 milimetres in diameter. Rain is the most common form of
precipitation.

Drizzle : The lightest form of precipitation is drizzle which occurs in fine drops falling
close together. Drops are less than 0.5 milimetres in diameter.

Snow and snow fall: Snow is a precipitation composed of powdery mass of ice
crystals, Snow forms in the extremely cold upper clouds.

In cold regions, the temperature often falls below freezing point and the water vapour
of the air condenses into ice crystals, These ice crystals grow in size and form ice
which fall on the ground. This form of precipitation 1s called Snow fall.

Sleet : Sleet is a mixture of rain and snow. When rain falls through a layer of cold

air near the Earth's surface, rain drops get frozen into ice.

Hailstone : Hailstones are frozen lumps of ice produced by thunderstorms, They form
inside tall cumulonimbus clouds which are warmer at the bottom and freezing at the
top.

2025
Atmosphere él

Rain occur when warm moist air cools and condenses. Warm air can hold more

water than cool air,So when the warmer air is cooled the moisture condenses to liquid,
it rains.

(4) Run off : The movement over ground of rain water is run off Run off oceurs
when the rainfall is very heavy and rocks and soil cannot absorb any more. Run off
flows into lakes, rivers and oceans. Run off are divided into four categories. They are :

(a) Surface flow
(b) Subsurface Now
(c) Percolation

(d) Infiltration

The water stored underneath the earth return to air through the process of transpiration
and evaporation.

Task: What do you understand from the words below? Discuss in a group and
wile it in the table.

Evaporation Condensation Precipitation Surface flow

Classification of rainfall

Convectional rain : The formation En,

of precipitation due to surface heating — oP oe.

of the air at the ground level (fig. i oe

5.3). If enough heating occurs, the Hot airascends Wi :

mass of air becomes warmer and fi i

lighter than the air in the Mii Maghran't
surrounding environment, and just Ai fH Wey —
like a hot air balloon itbegins to rise, Ocean le if

expand and cool. When sufficient oF | Hill

cooling has taken place saturation,
: foe . Fig. 3.3 : Convectional rain
eccurs forming precipitation. This :

process is active in the interior of continents and near the equator forming cumulus

Forma-11, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
82 Geography and Environment

clouds and possible later thunderstorms. Rain is usually the precipitation type that is
formed, and in most cases this moisture is delivered im large amounts over short

periods of time in extremely localized areas.

Orographic rain : Orographic rainfall is produced as a result of clouds formed
from the topography or shape of the
land. Where there is high ground or
mountain moist air is forced upwards
producing cloud and rainfall. Rainfall
occuming in the slopes of the

mountain is known as the windward

side and after crossing the mountain it

all
is known as the leeward side. No rainfall =i

occurs in the leeward side of the Fig. 5.4 : Orographic rain
mountain as the descending air is dry and it is called the Rain Shadow Area (fig. 5.4).

Mountainous areas close to prevailing westerly winds are most likely to experience
this type of raimfall. South-west monsoon wind blowing trom the Arabian Sea
towards South India obstructed by the Western Ghats mountain causes heavy
rainfall in the western slopes. The Deccan plateau located on the eastern side which
has less rainfall is the rain shadow area.

Frontal rain : Fronial rain occurs when two air masses meet. When a warm air mass
meets a cold air mass, they don’t mix as they have different densities. Instead, the warm and
less dense air is pushed up over the cold dense air creating the ‘front’. As a result, much
like when it is forced up over mountains, it cools, and the water condenses and falls as

rain drops (fig, 3.3).

—_

Front

Warm and Hurd Aur

fy f
ANH

f ! { vis
U ih aid AN, HH Dry and Cold A
Vy Bitlet yl

Ze

Fig. 5.5 : Frontal rain

2025
2025

Atmosphere i)

Cyclonic rain: If a low pressure
originates in a land mass in a region,
soon saturated warm air from the
land mass blow towards the low
water bodies and dry air from the
pressure centre. Warm air blowing
from the water is lighter and full
of water vapour. It tises above the

Fig, Sr teyeloniecrain dry dense cold air and causes

rainfall. This type of rainfall is known as cyclonic rainfall (fig. 5.6).

Task : What type of rainfall occurs in Bangladesh and why? Discuss this in your
class ina group and find the answer.

Movement of wild

Due to the difference in temperature and pressure the air moves [rom one place to
another. This movement of air is known as wind, The wind has certain characteristics :

1, The cold and heavy air moves [rom the high pressure areas to low pressure area,

2. The Earth is rotating trom west to east. Due to this reason the air moves towards
tight in the northern hemisphere and towards lefi in the southern hemisphere.

Pressure belts : Due to the variation of temperature in different latitudes and the
rotation of the earth, several pressure zones have been formed. These are knownas
pressure belts. Those are : (1) Equatorial low pressure belt, (2) Tropical high
pressure belt, (3) Subpolar low pressure belt, (4) Polar high pressure belt.

Some majot wind system ol the earth are : Planetary winds, Seasonal wind, Local
wind and Irregular winds.

Planetary winds

These winds are controlled by the pressure belts, blow towards same direction
throughout the year. The planetary winds are three type: the trade winds. the
westerly's and the polar winds (fig. 5.7).

The trade winds : The Sun’s ray falls vertically on the equatorial region. So the
warm and light air is mses upward, Cold and dense air from the subtropical high
a4 Geography. and Environment

pressure belts blows towards the equator. According to Ferrel's Law, the trade wind
blows from north-east in the

northern hemisphere and south-
east in the southern hemisphere

as south-east trade wind, In the

2A

ca

ancient lime the merchant ship
used to travel to the direction of

the wind and so this wind is SpE Se
known as the trade wind. The » ecertavee a

Ht
1\' ge

speed of north-east trade wind is eee ANA
16 kilometres per hour and south-
east trade wind 22.54 kilometres
per hour, As the air im the
« ‘ " Ve 1 ="

equatorial region tises upward. Fig. 5.7 : Planetary winds

there is no horizontal movement

of air around 5° north and south latitude of the equator, a calm sphere exist which

is known as Doldrums.

The westerlies: The subtropical high pressure belt lies from 30° north and south
latitude, and the air blows towards the subpolar low pressure belt at 60° latitude. The
air is warm and light as it blows from the tropical area. It rises above the dense cold
polar air and a part of it blows towards the subpolar low pressure belt. This is known
as the Westerly's. In the northern hemisphere. it blows from south-west and in the
southern hemisphere from north-west direction. In the northern hemisphere land mass
is greater. So the changes occur locally. However, in the southern hemisphere, the
Maximum area consists of water bodies and the Westerly's blow without any interruption.
The velocity of the Westerly’s reaches the highest between 4(°-47° south lattude and
so it is called the ‘Roaring Forties’. In ancient times when merchant ship travelled
ever Atlantic ocean to America from Europe for exporting horse and other goods the
ship could not sail at 30°-35° north latitude as there was no horizontal movement of
air. The sailors threw their horses in the sea due to crisis of water and food, So, the

calm belt on the Atlantic ocean is known as Horse Latitude. In northern hemisphere,

between 30°-35° north latitude due to the influence of westerly’s, rain falls in winter.

2025
2025

Atmosphere 85

Polar winds : Two more air masses regularly blow from north and south polar

high belts towards the subpolar lows. These are known as North-east and South-east
Polar wind,

Sea and land breeze : In the coastal regions, the temperature of adjacent land mass
rises with the advancement of day time, Therefore, alow pressure is formed locally and
comparatively the cool air from the high pressure area sea blows toward the land. This
is known as sea breeze (fig. 5.8). The velocity of this air reaches to Its maximum in
the afternoon,

After the sunset, the land mass cools quickly than the sea, During that time, the high
pressure prevails over the land mass. So, the air blows from the high pressure area
to the land mass towards the sea. This is known as the land breeze (fig. 5.9),

Fig. 3.8: Sea breeze Fig. 5.9 : Land breeze

Monsoon wind : Monsoon is an Arabic word meaning season, A monsoon is a
seasonal wind which changes direction with season. Monsoons cause wet
and dry seasons throughout much of South Asia (India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri
Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan and Maldives}. Monsoons are most often associated with the
Indian Ocean.

Monsoons always blow from cold to warm regions. The summer monsoon and the
winter monsoon determine the climate for most of India and South-east Asia.
There are two branches of monsoon winds : one is the Arabian ocean branch and
the other is the Bay of Bengal branch. The Arabian ocean branch provides rainfall
in Pakistan and Western India. The Bay of Bengal branch provides rainfall in
Bangladesh, Eastern and northern India, Nepal, Bhutan and Myanmar.
86 Geography and Environment

During winter the interior part of Asia remains very cold and so some high pressure
calls are created, The cold air blows from the north-east high pressure area of the land
mass towards the low pressure zone of the ocean. As this air originates in land
mass, it is dry and it doesn’t contain any water vapour. When this air crosses the
equator according to Ferrel’s Law blows over North Australia as the north-east
monseon.|t acquires large amount of moisture from the Indian Ocean causing heavy
shower to northern Australia.

The air which changes its direction with the change of season is known as

Andotropic wind. Monsoon wind and the Mediterranean winds are the Andotropic
wind,

Local wind : Natural characteristics or variation of temperature of an area are the
causes of local winds. Chinook from the Rocky mountains, Mistral from the
Central plateau region of France, Pampero originating in Argentina and Pampus
region of Uruguay, Bora im the Eastern coast of Adriatic sea, Sirocco in North

Africa and South Italy, Simoom in the Arab plateau, Khamsin im Egypt and Loo in
the Indian sub-continent are some of the local winds.

Task : Write down the origin and direction of the winds given below by
reading the planetary wind system.

The Trade winds The Westerly’s The Polar winds

Global warming and climate change

Global warming is one of the environmental problems of the world today, Climate
change is gradually taking place due to the global warming. Climate has been
changing since the begining of the Earth. Sometimes it was very hol, sometimes very dry.
Sometimes ice covered the whole earth. But the change was very slow. Millions of
years passed through slow change and some the change was natural such as the change
of the orbit of the Earth or the rotation of the Earth. But the change that is occurring
now is very [ast and so itis a matter of concern for everybody. This rapid change
is due to various activities of human being. In the last hundred years the average
temperature increased only 0.60° Celsius. But the scientists now forecast that at the
end of the 21st century the average temperature will increase between 2.5°- 4.§°
Celsius. As a result, there will be greater impact on the Earth's surface such as ice cap

2025
2025

Atmosphere &7

on the mountains will melt, glaciers will melt in the polar region which will
eventually increase the sea level,

Atmosphere is playing a vital role to control the Earth’s Temperature. In this field,
atmosphere is the roof of greenhouse or the roof of glass wall of the glass house. Sunshine
is the main source of heat and energy of the earth. The earth’s surface absorb the incoming
sunshine that reaches the earth which

eventually warms the environment. Various
activities of human beings such as burning
of wood and coal, cutting tree, smoke of
the factories, increase carbon dioxide
(CO,). methen ete. in the atmosphere.
These gases are called ‘Greenhouse’ gas,
gradually it creates a thick gas layer m the
atmosphere. For this reason, heat from the
earth surface cannot go back again into
the atmosphere. The amount of absorbsion
of heat imecreases and gradually the = oe
temperature rises. The heating process is — Fig, 5.10: Greenhouse
known as ‘Greenhouse’ impact or reaction.

In the polar region. polar heat is kept confined within the glass house and vegetables are

cultivated in it and that is why it is called ‘Greenhouse’ (fig. 5.10).

Activities of man led to the increase of certain greenhouse gases which is one
of the cause of global warming. This is known as the greenhouse effect.Carbon
dioxide and Nitrous oxide, Methane gases are responsible for global warming.
Industrialization, increase of transport, deforestation, and agricultural extension
are some of the causes which increased the amount of harmful gases in the
environment. Due to global warming higher rainfall, too much flood, strong
cyclones, drought can cause climate change in Bangladesh. Conservation of
environment and sustainable development techniques can save the world as
well as Bangladesh and other low lying countries of the world from the

Task : Find out the latest information on climate change of the world from
greenhouse effect by browsing in the internet at school or home.

Effect of climate change

The pattern of climate in the world is gradually changing. Normal seasonal pattern
is not found in the nature anymore. Drought in rainy season, rainy season in
drought, cold air during stammer and warm air during winter are some of the
unnatural pattern of the climate. According to the scientists, greenhouse effect will
be beneficial to some countries like Canada, Russia, Norway, Finland, Sweden and

88 Geography and Environment

South America, But 40 percent of the worlds area will suffer where people live in
poverty. Along with Bangladesh there are many low lying countries in the world
whose coastal areas will be submerged under water. Many coastal cities of the
world will be destroyed (fig. 5.11).

In the middle ofthe 21st century 20
percent of the world’s population
will face misfortune. Sea level
will rise in the Pacific region
— and Asia which will change the
nature of climate. Tidal wave may
destroy the crops, sweet water
will be polluted, saline water
will enter inland, forests will be
destroyed, wild animals will
decrease and the people of the
country will migrate to other
region of the country as climate
refugee. In Bangladesh people living in low lying coastal areas will be the
first victims.

Fig. 5.11: Greenhouse effect

Worldwide greenhouse effect will create an upheaval and chaos in the developed
and the developing world in social, economic and political sectors, Developed
countries will feed the animals with their excess production of food crop and the
people of the developing countries will suffer in starvation and become refugees
crossing the borders of their own country. In the meantime economic recession in
many countries is going on. In the developing countries majority of the poor is
leading a life below poverty line. Bangladesh is not different from them. In India,
Pakistan, Indonesia, Malaysia and China the pattern of climate is drastically changing
in the recent time. In Ausiralia, summer is getting long and the winter is becoming
more rainy,

Task : Each student may Make a list of misery due to climate change in different
regions of the world,

Impact of climate change in Bangladesh

Developing countries of the world already started suffering due to global warming
and climate change. Natural disaster has already started in Bangladesh. In the near
future the intensity will increase. According toUN forecasting, in the next 50 years if
the sea level rises 3 feet a large part of the coastal area of Bangladesh will go under
water which will be around 17 percent of the land surface, Approximately 3 crore
people will lose their cropping land and home and become a climate refugee.

2025
Atmosphere 89

According to the information of International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) by
2030 the river flow will drastically reduce. which will result in water scarcity by
2050 and 100 crore people will be affected, Due to high temperature frequent
floods, storms, drought and sea level rise, Bangladesh is experiencing some of the

weather disturbances now and the intensity will rise in future.

According to ADB (Asian Development Bank) report, if the present trend of global
warming continues till 2050 crop production in South Asian countries will drastically
reduce. Impact of climate change will directly affect more than 150 crore people of
South Asia of food and water. It has been predicted that due to global warming at
the end of this century farming in the world will decrease between 20%-40%.
According to the research of the economists of MIT (Massachusetis Institute of
Technology). the global warming will increase the gap between rich and poor

countries.

In 2009 the World Bank has pointed out 5 risky areas for global warming, These
are: desertification, flood, storm, sea level rise and uncertainty in the agriculture sector.
According to The World Bank there are 12 countries in the world which have the
possibility of all hazards and Bangladesh is one of them. (Table 2).

Table 2 : List of 12 countries in 5 category of global warming risk

Desertification Flood Storm Sea level rise | Uncertainty in
the Agricultural
sector
Malawi *Bangladesh | Philippines | Low Island Sudan
Ethiopia China *Bangladesh | Vietnam Senegal
#imbabwe India. Madagascar) Egypt Zimbabwe
India Cambodia Vietnam Tunisia Mali
Mozambique Mozambique | Moldova Indonesia Zambia
Niger Laos Mongolia Mauritania Morocco
Mauritania Pakistan Haiti China Niger
Eritrea Sri Lanka Samoa Mexico India
Sudan Thailand Tonga Myanmar Malawi
Shad Vietmam China *Bangladesh Algeria
Kenya Benin Henduras Senegal Ethiopia
Tran Ruanda Fiji Libya Pakistan

Source ; World Bank, 2009

In 1992, one of the organizations of United Nations named UNFCCC (United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change) decided to organize a conference of the

Forma-l2, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
90 Geography and Environment

world leaders on world clumate every year. Its main aim is to resolve the problems of
ihe change of world climate. This conference is precisely called as COP (Conference of
the Parties).

A three page Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was recognized as a note in the
world climate conference of the United Nations in 2009 in Copenhagen, the capital city
of Denmark. It was deciced in that MOU to limit the tise of temparature within 2°
Celsius at the end of this century, in order to face the situation out of climate change
and a fund of three thousand dollar for the years 2010-2012 was also mentioned. The
money of climate find would be spend for aforrestation, hand over of technology and
achieving sustainability. As aresult, developing countries like China, India. Brazil and
other than poor countries should get the money from this fund. The United Nations has
mentioned this as political understanding.

Task : From the table 2 find out the position of Bangladesh in Asia among 12

countries in the list of five categories of risk.

Exercise

Multiple choice questions
1. In which sphere of the atmosphere does argon gas exist?
a. Stratosphere b. Troposphere
c. Exosphere d. Thermosphere
2. The characteristics of troposphere is —
i. humid air.
ii. suitable for running planes.
iu. absorbs ultraviolet rays.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. Land ii b.  iand ili
c. iiand iii di, ii and ili
Read the text and answer the questions 3 and 4.

Ananya went to Sylhet with her father. From there she went to see Jayantika hill.
They saw from there that it was raining in one side of the hillslope whereas no rain on
the opposite slope.

2025
2025

Atmosphere 9]

3. What kind of rainfall did Ananya see?
a, Convectional rain b. Orographic rain
ce. Cyclonic rain d. Frontal rain
4. The cause of not raining in the opposite side of the hill —
i. less amount of water vapour in the air,
il, warm and dry air.
ii. increase of water vapour in the air.
Which one of the following is correct?
a tandi b. iandin
c land i d. i, hand iit
5. Air always blows from one place to another?
a. Mountains obstruct on the way of air
b. Difference between heat and pressure
c, Due to location change of the pressure belt
d. Due to equatorial hich and low pressure belts
6. Why do sea breeze and land breeze blow regularly in Bangladesh?
a. Due to larger land areas
b. The location of Himalayas lying on the north of Bangladesh
c. As the Bay of Bengal les in the south
d. As Bangladesh is a land of rivers

7. The most important characteristics of monsoon wind —
i. Itis aregional wind,

i. Seasonal wind.
iii. Monsoon wind change it direction in winter and summer.
Which one of the following is correct?
a landi b. iand i
ce. iiand it dd. i,tiand imi

8. Find out the category of global warming risk in Bangladesh.
a. Certainty of agriculture b. Earthquake

c. Increase of temperature d. Desertification
92 Geography and Environment

Creative questions

1. T
§
R
Q
Ty
Earth Surface
a. What is atmosphere?
b. Explain the benefits of having higher amount of nitrogen in the atmosphere.
c. Write the characteristics of "Q’ layer.
d. Which one between “R’ and ‘S’ layer is more important for us? Put
arguments in favour of your answer,
2.
a 4800 Kilometres —— iB ?
Q zg
a. Whatis Khamsim?
b. Write the Ferrel's law.
ce. Explain wind movement of “EFGL location in the map.
d. Isthe movement of wind same m ‘TJKL' and ‘PORS' places? Analyze your

opinion.

2025
