CHAPTER SIX
Business Plan

The main objective of business is to make profit. If there is planning in running
business, success becomes easier and possibility of failure reduces. Sometimes,
many enthusiastic entrepreneurs can not become successful because of lack of
proper planning in regard to the business. In this chapter, we shall discuss
various aspects of business planning.

Entrepreneurship Concept
Technique
Forecast
Business
Source of
Sales Plan fund
Market Expenditure Consumer

At the end of this chapter the students will be-

* Explain the concept and importance of business planning

« Explain the process of business planning

* Explain the concept of project planning and its importance

* Describe the steps of project planning

* Able to select the right business in entrepreneurship through project selection
process,

« Able to prepare the structure table for project planning,

* Explain the concept and necessity of sel-analysis.

+ Explain the process of self-analysis step by step.

Busmess Entreprencurship, Class 9-10, Forma-I1
2 Business Entrepreneurship

Concept of Business Plan

Business plan is the chart/ graph of the future activities of business. It is written
documents through which the objective of the business, nature, management
style, financing, present status and future development process are depicted.
Business planning provides the proper guide-lines for a business to achieve
success and follow the right course. Business planning helps the businessman to
reach his objective like radar helping an aero plane to reach its destination.
Business planning is necessary in both cases, starting a new business or
expansion of existing business. A business planning can be compared to the road
map of a tourist or blue print for a building constructor.

Importance of Business Plan

The importance of business plan is Immense in starting the business,
maintaining it properly and operating it to reach the objective. The main
importance of business plan is as follows:

1, Guide line to operate the business: To achieve the objective of business
what, when, how and at what time a thing is to be done is properly
mentioned in the plan. As a result it works as a deed of guideline to the
entrepreneur.

2. Capital arrangement and Investment: When additional capital is
necessary for a business, it is not possible for the entrepreneur to arrange
the additional capital, then bank loan or from other sources capital is to be
arranged. In this case, the lender or the investor can take decision by
analyzing the business plan before extending the loan.

3. Proper utilization of government facilities: Small and medium size
enterprises receive many facilities from the government. Business Plan
helps to avail those facilities.

4. Helps to make decision: Business plan helps to take decision and give a
concept about the competitor, which way the business should be expanded
in future, which business is more profitable, what product is to be
produced in future etc.

Besides above mentioned things, by reading the business plan the stakeholders
can gam a clear concept of the business.

Process of Business Plan

The success of business depend on right selection of the project. A project is a
planned and thoughtful work process to be completed within a particular time

20235
2025

Business Plan Ba

and objective. It starts and ends at a specified time. A project may be a new
venture for investment or expansion of old business. The first step of the
business plan process is to identify the concepts and evaluate them for selection.

1. Identifying the Project Concept:

Selection of the project starts from the identifying the concept of the project
by the entrepreneur. He can assess the surrounding environment and get the
idea for the demand of a product and services. Selection of a project depends
on this demand. Normally, the demand of product and services give birth to
the project idea. During the selection of the project it is wise to think of
products related to entrepreneur's hobby or interest, products having real
demand, prevailing disadvantages of the products, opportunity of using new
technology. The sources of new project concepts are entrepreneur's own
thinking, various government and non-government publication, economic and
industrial report and research report.

2. Evaluation of the Concepts and Selection of the Project:

An Entrepreneur shall make a list of the probable projects after analyzing the
information from various sources. A project shall be selected from the list
after analyzing it through various methods. A project can be selected by two
methods by analyzing the selected concepts. One is Macro-screening and the
other is Micro-screening.
a) Macro-Screening
Macro-screening is such a process which helps to select a project by evaluating
the influential elements of the business concepts. All the businesses are
influenced by some elements which are beyond control of the entrepreneur.
These elements are population, economy, politics, society, cultural and legal
environment.

e Population: The existence, progress and advancement of a business
depend upon the population of the locality where the business is located.
The demand of the product is influenced by the size of the market,
population, and population growth ratio.

« Economic Environment: The demand of the product is also influenced
by the consumer's income, savings, expenditure pattern and standard of
living. Decision should be taken considering these elements while
selecting a project.
B4 Business Entrepreneurship

e Natural Environment: Natural environment plays a vital role in
selecting a project. The raw materials for the industry come from the
natural environment. But, those businesses should be avoided which
destroy the environment.

» Political Environment: Political stability, ideology of the leading
parties and attitude of the politicians also influence the business
activities.

e Cultural Environment: Education rate, expansion of technical

education, social ethics and religious values work as an important
element for selection of the business project.

» Legal environment: The prevailing law of the state, industrial policy
contribute a lot to the expansion of the business of a country.

Selection of project through Macro-screening is an initial stage. To select the
project finally and assess the appropriateness of the project, detailed scrutiny is
done with the help of Micro-screening.

B. Micro-Screening:

Micro-screening is the detailed process of selecting a project through analyzing
the market demand, technical, commercial and financial aspect and contribution
to the national economy, etc. The elements of micro-screening are explained
below:

« Market Demand: Through market survey and analysis of market
demand, consumet's point of view and interest, number of competitors in
the market and advantages and disadvantages of products are properly
justified,

e Technical Aspect: Technical aspects of projects are justified from the
technological and mechanical point of view. Production processes,
technology specification, selection of machineries, feasibility of
implementation of the projects are included in these types of jobs.

« Commercial Aspect: Profitability or commercial viability ofa project is
most important to select a project. In this case, elements of production
cost, sales price, estimated profit etc, are to be considered very carefully.

e Financial Aspect: In this case. a project is selected considering the
expenditure of the project, sources of financing, return on investment etc.

£023
2025

Business Plan 85

« Contribution to the National Economy: It is also essential to evaluate
how the project shall contribute to the national economy. The yardstick
to measure the economic contribution is employment generation, tax
payment to the national treasury ete.

From the discussed point of view, projects having realistic and profitable
attributes are selected for investment. It is mentionable here that in case of small
enterprises and retailing projects; contribution to the national economy is not
significant. But, in case of medium and large business such as manufacturing or
production oriented business macro and micro-screening both are necessary to
select a project.

3. Submission of Business Project Report

The last stage of the business plan is to prepare an excellent report. This report
is prepared on the basis of justifiable information of the probability of the
selected project.

Guideline for Small Business Plan

Tt is necessary to be careful while preparing a business plan. The entrepreneur
can make the report himself or with the help of any other specialist. The
following guidelines can be followed to prepare a proper business plan:

« Business plan should be precise and free from excessive wordings.

® The objective of the business is to focus only on one or two products and
place for the product and market selection.

« In the management process of the business unknown person should
not be included

*® Any product should not be described with words only understood
by the professionals; rather, it should be comprehensible to all.

e Sales velume should be projected on the basis of realistic quantity
of production capacity. Sales account should be maintained very carefully.

« Business plan should not be drafted on the basis of vague information.

® There should be a detailed discussion on the present and probable
problems of the business in the business plan.

* It is necessary to involve all the members of the management team in
making business plan and if necessary, advice from an expert may be
sought for.
a6 Business Entrepreneurship

Contents of Small Business Plan

The subject matter of the business plan may vary on the basis of the size
of the business, variation in nature and types of the business. But, the following
things are common in a business plan:

1. Name of the Business organization

2. Address of the organization

3. Name of the Entrepreneur(s)

4. Brief of the entrepreneurs or directors

5. Nature of business (Sole proprietorship, Partnership, Joint Stock Company)

6. Management style of the business (Single, partnership or joint management)

7. Amount of Capital

§. Precise description of market survey (size of the market, possibility of
future progress, ways to penetrate the market, pricing of the product.)

9. Possibility of profit generation (Target profit and guideline to achieve
future target profit )

10. Attachment of projected Financial Statement

Total cost of the project

Projected Income

Projected expenditures

Projected Income Statement

Projected Balance sheet

Projected Cash-flow statement

Statement of Break Even Analysis

mie apogee

A. projected financial statement for a grocery project on the basis of
sole proprietorship is depicted below:

1. Cost of Project

Fixed Capital Amount (Taka)
(This type of cost is to bear at the time of starting the
business only) 2.00,000,00
Advance Rent for the Shop 3,00,000.00
Furniture & Fixtures 50,000.00
Others

5,50,000.00

Total

2025
2025

Business Plan

Working Capital

87

(These types of expenditures have to make all the year round to operate the

business stnoothly)
Purchase of various goods
Salary of workers/staffs
Electricity Bill

Rent

Others

Total

Total Cost of the Project
Fixed Capital
Working Capital

Total

Financing of the Project:
Own Source

Borrowing from Relatives
Bank Loan

Total Project Cost

Projected Income Statement

Revenue (from Sales)
Estimated Cost :
Purchase of goods
Salary

Electric Bill

Rent

Personal expenses of the owner
Others

Projected Income (yearly)

3,00,000.00
48,000.00
12,000.00
36,000.00
54,000.00
4,50,000.00

5,50,000.00
4,50,000.00

10,00,000.00

6,00,000,00
2,00,000.00
2,00,000.00
10,00,000.00

6,00000.00

3,00000.00
48,000.00
12,000.00
36,000.00
60,000.00
54,000.00

90,000.00
88 Business Entrepreneurship

Estimated Cashflow Analysis

It is necessary to estimate the Cashflow to operate the business smoothly. This
statement can be preserved daily, weekly and on a monthly basis. In this
statement, how much Cash flow is made and how much expenditures is to be
made in a particular period of time is estimated. Because of preparation of
cashflow statement, the entrepreneur can have a clear idea about the cash
position of the business.

Break Even Analysis

Break Even indicates such a state of the business where the income and
expenditure of the business become equal. It is neither loss nor profit scenario of
the business. More precisely stated when revenue from quantity of goods sold
becomes equal to the volume of expenditures is called Break Even, The point at
which the sales and expenditure become equal is called Break Even Point.
Correct pricing of the product, for expected profit increase of the sales volume,
profit planning, increase of profit etc. are possible if the Break Even Point is
predefined.

For example, if a businessman manufactures 5000 Cricket bats and sells them he
gets no profit of loss, However, if he manufactures more than 5000 Cricket bats
he earns profit.On the other hand, if he manufactures less than 5000 Cricket bats
he gets loss. In this case manufacturing of 5000 Cricket bats is the break-even
point.

Concept and Process of Self Analysis

Tt is necessary to justify the capability of the entrepreneur to run the business
before starting it. The main reason for this is because there is possibility of
success and risk of failure in a business. As a result, it is wise to assess the
capability before starting the business. It is a complex procedure to assess the
business capability,

If the following work chart is properly filled up by an entrepreneur, he would be
able to find out whether he has the quality of becoming an entrepreneur:

Sl No. Question Yes ( 1) No (0)
| Can you draft a Business Plan?

|

2 Can you take decision at any situation and
maintain your decision in adversity’?

3 Are you willing to take responsibility and
lead? }

Business Plan 89

4 Do people trust and honor you with whom you
stay?
5 Are you physically fit?
6 Can you work for long time?
7 Do you feel free to mix and work with others?
8 Can you communicate effectively with others
and influence them to achieve your goal?
9 Can others easily understand your thinking
and concept?
10 Do you have in depth knowledge about the
business that you want to start?
I Do you have idea about the related factors of
the business such as tax, accounts etc,
12 Do you have experience and concept in marketing
and finance?
13 Do you have sufficient supply of fund to start
the business?
14 Do you have idea about the materials to start
the business?
15 Do you want to start the business staying
above all?
After answering the above questions you will give 1 marks for positive

answer and o for negative answers. Now, count your total achieved number. If
your number 1s:

12 or more then : Enough possibility of becoming entrepreneur

7-11 : Your possibility is not to the optimum level, but you
can be successful if you try more.

Below 7 : You do not have sufficient will power to be an entrepreneur

Tn many cases, because of lack of competency, efficiency and willingness a
person can not become an entrepreneur.but the scenario may change. Then you
can also be an entrepreneur,

By analyzing the Self Assessment Process mentioned above, try to find out
the necessity of Self Assessment:

Business Entwepreneurship, Clase 9-10, Forma-12
90 Business Entrepreneurship

Activity 1: Necessity of Self Assessment

EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question

1. Which one helps the business man to achieve his desired goal?
a. Capital b. Plan
c. Consumer’s Income d. Demand for products
2. How a project begins?
a. From the demand of products —_b. From the interest of the entrepreneurs

c. From technical education d. From using latest technology

After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3 & 4:

Mr. Shamim stayed abroad for a long time. Recently, after returning home he has
opened a highly decorated Fast Food shop m his locality. The area is populous
but economically not so developed. As a result, he could not make profit as

expected.

3. What issue did Mr, Shamim disregard before starting the business?
a. Size of the Market b. Demand for the product
c. Literacy Rate d. Quality of Product
4. The reason for not having expected profit from the business of Mr. Shamim-
i. Consumers” low income
ii, Not selecting the right product
iii, Small size of the market
Which one of the following is correct?
a. i & ti b.i & iii
c. i & ii di, it & iti

20235
2025

Business Plan a1

Creative Question

1. After completing graduation from BUET, Mr. Arif along with several friends
decided to take up a project of establishing a cement factory considering huge
demand for the construction and housing industry in the country. They drew a
detailed and long term picture of their whole work plan before selecting the
project. They arranged alternative source to accumulate capital since they did
not have sufficient fund of their own for primary expenditure.

a. What it is called to know the market demand of a product?

b. Describe the technical side of business,

c. What type of capital is necessary to implement the project of Mr. Arif
and his friends in light of above paragraph? Explain.

d. Mr. Arif & his friends have followed appropriate way for selecting a
project. — give your own opinion in this regard.

2. Mr. Shahed is the owner of M/s. Ananda Confectionary. His business
income and expenditures are mentioned below in table:

Expenditure Taka Income Taka
Advance against Rent 1,00,000,00 Sales 516,000.00
Purchase raw materials 1,50,000.00
Wages $0,000.00
Furniture & Fixtures 1,00,000.00
Rent 60,000.00
Workers Salary 36,000.00
Electricity Bill 12,000.00
Other Expenses 8,000.00

a. From which environment do we get the raw materials for industry?
b. What do you understand by working capital, Explain
c. Find the projected profit of Mr. Shahed’s business.

d. Is the present condition of Mr. Shahed’s business satisfactory? Give
your opinion,
