Chapter Nine
Resources and Economic Activities

Human bemgs need resources to maintain the daily necessities of life and these are
important for an economy. What types of economic activities are performed
by the people of different countries of the world based on the use of resources?
What are the factors of the industrial development’? Why does the imbalance of
export and import happen?

Economic activites

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-

* describe the concept of resources and classify them;

* explain the ways of conservation of resources:

* aware people for conservation of resources:

* explain the economic activities;

® explain the economic activities of undeveloped. developing and developed
countries:

2025
2025

Resources and Economic Activities 139

*® explain the factors of industrial development;
e explain the classification and analyze the location of industries;
« explain the export and import trade;

® analyze the relation between balance of trade and development.

Concept of resources

The goods which can meet up demand and the supply of the goods are limited then the

demand is called Resources. The goods whose supply is unlimited cannot be regarded
as resources.

Classification of resources
Resources are divided into three categories primarily :
(1) Natural resources

(2) Human resources

(3) Economic resources

Natural resources : Natural resources are classified into three categories. According
to the scientists, the process of creation of non-renewable resources is very slow and
their supply is limited. There are many resources which are exhausted with the
passage of time such as natural gas, iron ore, coal and petroleum is decreased due to
extraction. All these minerals are known as non-renewable resources as once
extracted is no longer recycled. The renewable resources mean those kinds of

resources which are continuously produced but changeable. Hydroelectricity is an
excellent example of renewable resources. Human resources are the human beings

with proper education and training.

Economic resources : The classic economic resources include the land, labour and
capital. Entrepreneurship is also considered as Economic resource because
individuals are responsible for creating businesses and moving economic
resources in the business environment. These economic resources are also called the
factors of production.
140 Geography and Environment

¥

Natural resources | Human resources | [ Economic resources |
Renewable : Solar | | Non-renewable : | Land | | Capital | {Labourer |[Enterpreneurship|
power, wind power.| | Petroleum, natural
water power, as, coal, iron ore.

Task : Give at least two example of various types of resources (individual work). ‘|

Conservation of Resources

Conservation of resources means using of natural resources in such a way so that it
can be used for a longer time period for the benefit of many people. The
other names of conservation are education, truthfulness, justice, devotion or love for
nature. According to the economists the resources are not unlimited, Proper
management for utilizing the resources is very essential.

Increasing renewable resources is possible only through proper management.
Environment friendly management is desirable. Non-renewable resources can be
destroyed by burning oil or gas. But the environment is not polluted if the solar
electricity is generated by using renewable solar energy and the hydroeleciricity
is generated by using water resources. Various usable things can be turned into
resources by recycling minimizing wastage of resources.

Use of chemical fertilizer increased production in the beginning, but later on, it
decreases the land's fertility. In this regard the idea of using organic fertilizer can
be brought under consideration. The different soil conservation methods can be used
for protecting the cropping soil such as the terrace farming and crop rotation.
Besides the soil of fallow land can be conserved through afforestation. Used
materials can be recycled and produced as a useful resource. All of us should be
careful about protecting the land, water, mineral resources and natural environment
and stop the wastage which will increase the usage of these resources for a
longer period. Conservation of resources through 3R method is necessary. 3R is
known as Reduce, Reuse and Recycle.

Task : How to prevent the wastage of resources (group work)?

2025
2025

Resources and Economic Activities 141

Economic activities

Any sort of human behaviour related to the production and exchange is called
Economic activities. Economic activities are classified into three categories.

(1) Primary economic activities
(2) Secondary economic activities

(3) Tertiary economic activities

Primary economic activities : Primary economic activites are those activities where
natural resources are extracted from the earth. Examples of primary activities are
mining, farming and fishing. Natural resources are those resources, which are found
in nature and are of benefit to mankind.

Secondary economic activities : The secondary economic sector deals with the
processing of raw materials into finished goods. Builders and potters are
examples of secondary economic sector workers. Lumber from trees is used to

build houses and clay from earth is used to make pottery.

In the secondary economic activities products that are collected in primary economic
activity are processed by changing their forms and increasing their value, The
extracted iron ore from mines is changed into steel and iron products.
Manufacturing all types of mechanical equipment to cooking all come under
secondary economic activities.

Tertiary economic activities : The tertiary economic sector has to do with
services to businesses and consumers. The activities of whole sellers, hawkers, bankers,
teachers, doctors, nurse, lawyers, barbers and rickshaw pullers, fall into the category
of tertiary economic sector workers. Transportation, banking, tourism and retail
stores are all part of the tertiary economic sector.

Task : Write down the economic activities of shop keeper, iron monger, teacher,
farmer, business person and nurse in the table below (group work).
Primary activities Secondary activities Tertiary activities

142, Geography and Environment

The economic activities of undeveloped, developing and developed countries

The different countries of the world are classified into undeveloped, developing and
developed on the basis economic power. Around 30%o-80% people of undeveloped
and developing countries are engaged in primary economic activity, such as,
Bangladesh, Myanmar, Bhutan, Nepal, Cambodia, Ethiopia, Kenya and Zambia. People
of these countries are engaged in animal rearing, fishing, wood collecting and in
physical labour. More than 80 percent people of developed countries like USA,
UK, Canada, Japan, China. Italy, Germany, France, Spain, Australia and New
Zealand are involved im the secondary and tertiary economic activities. People of
these countries are engaged more as industnal labour, teacher, doctor, engineer, nurse,
business. cultural activity, politics, research and social work. In these countries
literacy rate, standard of living and per capita income are higher than undeveloped and
developmg countries,

The factors of industrial development

Industries develop on natural and economic factors. The natural factors are : (1)
Climate, (2) proximity to energy resources, (3) availability of raw materials.
Economic factors are : (4) Capital, (5) supply of labour, (6) proximity to the market,
(7) use of modern technology, (8) good transport system, (9) government investment
policies and (10) political stability.

Natural factors

(1) Climate : Climate means the average temperature, rainfall, water vapours and
humidity of an area over a long period of time. It is difficult to develop industries in
tropical countries where the workers vel tired easily due to high temperature, So, the
temperature is controlled by air conditioner. It increases the price of production. But
in temperate and cold countries industrial workers can work over a longer period of

time without being tired.

In an indirect way the location of industries depends on the climate. In different
types of climate different type of raw material is produced. Such as Jute grows
well in the tropical climate of our country. So a large number of jute industries have
developed in our country, Similarly Khulna newsprint mill has been established to
use the Sundari tree as raw material from Sunderbans.

(2) Proximity to energy resources: The location of industries depends on the
proximity to energy resources. As energy resources are needed to run the industries.

2025
2025

Resources and Economic Activities 143

Large industries need energy to run which is produced from coal, petroleum.
natural gas, and bydroelectricity. Basically Industries are developed in those area
where there are abundant supply of energy resources.

(3) Availability of raw materials : Raw materials are required for industries.
So. the industries develop in areas where raw materials are abundant and cheap, In
Bangladesh there is an abundant supply of bamboo and cane in Chandraghona
area, In Rangamati and so Karnaphuli paper mill has been established there.

Economic factors

(4) Capital : Capital is required to establish an industry. A large amount of
money i8 necessary for purchasing land, equipment for industries, payment of
labourers and for transportation. The industries are developed in areas where capital
is available.

(5) Supply of labour : Supply of labour is an important factor for the
development of industries. A large number of industries are developed in more
heavily populated countries due to availability of cheap and abundant labour.

(6) Proximity to the market : A proper market is needed to fulfill the demand for
industrial products. If suitable market is not available the possibility of the
industry to survive is difficult. So, industries are usually established near the
market. Usually there is a heavy demand for industrial products in a densely
populated area,

(7) Good transport system : A good transport system plays an important role for
setting up the industries. In developed countmes as there are good roads,
railways, waterways and airways, there are more industries. Dhaka, Chittagong and
Narayanganj has good transport system than the rest of the country which leads to
the location of mere industries than other areas of Bangladesh,

(8) Use of modern technology : It is not possible to exist in the free market
econonly without applying the modern technologies in industries. For this reason, the
commodities produced by Japan, China, Germany, USA, England etc. using the modern
technologies are in demand in the world.

(9) Government investment policies : The government introduces some policies to
encourage investment by the local and imternational investors to establish industries in
this country. [f the policies are favourable to the investors then more industries will be
established in the country,
144 Geography and Environment

(10) Political stability : Political stability is essential for developing industries by
the local and international investors. Countries where there are democratic system of

government, the number of industries increase and the economy becomes strong.

Classification of industries

On the basis of natural resources like petroleum, agriculture, animals and forest
resources different kinds of industries grow up. Generally. industries are
classified into three categories. Such as ;

(1) Small seale industry
(2) Medium scale industry
(3) Large scale industry

(1) Small scale industry : The industry which needs few labourers and little capital is
called small scale industry. The workers produces with small machineries and equipments.
These kinds of industries develop in the village and urban areas as private
enterprise such as dairy farm, handloom industry and bakery.

(2) Medium scale industry : A private enterprise starts functioning with the funding
from a financial institution of 2 crore taka and employs more than 100 workers is
known as the medium scale industry. These industries are : Ready-made garments
and leather processing industries.

(3) Large scale industry : Massive infrastructure, a large number of laborers and
a large quantity of capital is essential for developing these types of industry. Such as
: iron and steel industry, textile industry, motor car imdustry, shipbuilding industry
etc. These industries contribute to the economic growth, foreign exchange earnings
where thousands of labourers are employed and the unemployment problem is
reduced. These industries are located near the cities.

Import and export trade

No country in the world is self-sufficient with all sorts of resources. Many countries
import the products according to the demand of people maintaining the international
business protocol and the surplus products are exported to the other counties. Il is called
Import and Export trade,

Such as, Japan exports the heavy machineries made by iron and steel, electronic

2025
Resources and Economic Activities 145

products, motor car, shipbuilding and various industrial products and Japan import
iron and coal from other countries. Bangladesh imports rice, wheat, edible oil,
thread, petroleum goods, electronics machineries and exports garments, agricultural
products, tea, leather, ceramic products, frozen food, raw jute and jute products
etc. In this way a trade relationship is maintained through export and imports.

Trade balance and development of relationship

Trade balance among different countries in the world are not equal, as there is
a great difference between import and export trades. The trade balance of any
couniry in the world depends on economic ability of a country. The trade
imbalance is often seen among the economically developed countries and the less
developed and developing countries of the world, Bangladesh has trading imbalance
relationship with Indian and China. Bangladesh imports more from these countries
than it exports. This ts called trade deficit. Number of export items are : ready-made
gamments, shrimps, leather, jute products and tea. Balance of trade between
Bangladesh and USA is positive and so Bangladesh is in a better position.
Bangladesh has a trade surplus with Germany, France and United Kingdom also.

Table 1 : Trading balance report of last six years of Bangladesh

Years Import Export Proportion to export
(In million US dollar) | (In million US dollar) | and import imbalance

2015 | 40,6850 31.208.9 | 9476.1 I
| 2016 | 39,715.0 | 34.257,.2 | 5.4578

2017 43,491.0 34.655.9 8,835.1

2018 54,463.2 36,668.2 17,795.0

2019 35,438.5 40,535.0 14,903.35

2020 50,691.0 33,674.1 17.016.9

Source : Foreign Exchange Policy Department, Bangladesh Bank, Annual Report, 2015-2020.

Forma-19, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
146 Geography and Environment

Exercise

Multiple choice questions
1. Which one is an export product of Bangladesh?
a, Edible oil b, Garments

c. Petroleum d, Electronics machineries

2. How to increase the renewable energy?
a. Through proper management b. Conservation

c. Responsible in using d. By making good habits of life

Read the text below and answer questions 3 and 4;

Tuhin works in a industry which has large number of workers, a plenty of capital
and huge infrastructure.

3. In which industry does Tuhin work?
a. Bicycle b. Large scale industry
ce. Television industry d. Motor ear
4. This kind of industry is located —
1. near the city.
ii. beside the city.
ili, inside the city.
Which one of the following is correct?
a jandii b. iand iii

ce. iiand iii ad. i, ii, and iii

2025
2025

Resources and Economic Activities 147

Creative questions

1.

Not far from Dhaka, between Demra and Narayanganj. on the banks of
Shityalakha river many industries grew up. Among them the EPZ, jute mills
and cotton mills are mentionable.

a,
b.
c.

d.

What type of activity is agriculture?
What is meant by trade deficit?
Explain the classification of the industries mentioned above.

Analyze the natural causes of developing the industries in this regions.

Abed and Shahed are two friends. Abed has established a dairy farm with 80
foreign cows. On the other hand, Shahed has established a garment industry at
Ashulia and the demand of garments is great outside the country.

a.
b.

C,

How many types of economic activities are there?
What is meant by trade balance? Explain.
Which activity does include Abed’s farm’? Explain.

What kind of role does the industry of Shahed play in the economic
development of Bangladesh. Give reasons.
