2025

water absorption from the undigested part of food in the colon, slow movement
of the undigested part of the food through the alimentary canal, leading a lazy
life, intestinal disorder, slowing down of the contraction of colonic muscles, and

not eating food containing roughage increase the probability of constipation,
Due to constipation the passing stool becomes difficult. This results in an uneasy
feeling in the abdomen, abdominal pain and various accompanying disorders.
Long term constipation may cause hernias or other complexities. Constipation
may also occur due to tumours of alimentary canal or other diseases, So it 1s
wise to consult a doctor if constipation occurs.

To prevent this disease the things to do are— eat fibrous food, drmk enough
water, regularly eat vegetables, fruits, apples, bananas, coconut, dates, oranges,
papaya, pine apple, tea etc. One should make a habit of regular walking and
passing of stool.

(d) Gastric and Peptic Uleer : An ulcer is the inflammation and sores of the
stomach or the intestine. A peptic ulcer indicates open sores or ulcers of the
digestive tract. [fit occurs in the stomach, it is called a gastric ulcer. fit occurs
in the duodenum, it is called Duodenal Ulcer. Irregularities in eating, cause the
over secretion of acid. If this continues for a long time, sores in stomach and
intestine occur.

Research of physician Robin Warren (1951—till today) and Barry Marshall
(1937—till today) has shown that though uregularities in taking food, taking
spicy food or stress may cause peptic ulcers, the main reason is a bacteria named
Helicobacter pylori (in short H pylori). For this discovery, in the year of 2005
they received the Nobel Prize in Medicine. Previously, it was thought that no
bacteria could ever survive in the strong hydrochloric acid (pH 1.5—3.5) inside
the stomach. In order to prove his discovery, Barry Marshall drank a cocktail
consisting of a beaker full of VY pylori bacteria and became seriously ill from a
peptic ulcer (It is important to note that this bacterium not only causes ulcer but
can also cause stomach cancer. Marshall took a great risk to his life which should
not be followed). Feeling continuous dull pain in the mid part of the abdomen is
caused by this disease. Pain increases in an empty stomach or after taking excessive
fatty foods. It may cause vomiting. Sometimes blood may come out with stool
and vomit. The disease can be ascertamed by endoscope or barium x-rays.
Things that should be followed to prevent this disease are: eat easily digestible
food regularly, avoid spicy and oily food. Drinking boiled milk, cheese, or eating
bananas gives some relief. Fating regularly, avoiding stimulating substances,

such as- coffee, cigarette etc. following treatment and consulting the physician
may help in preventing this disease. However, we have learnt from the discovery
of Marshall and Warren that if anybody gets infected by H pylori, then his
disease may not be cured even after following the above mentioned health rules.
For his full recovery, antibiotics should be taken as prescribed by a physician
along with eating on time.

(e) Appendicitis : In the right side of the lower part of the abdomen a finger like
pouch that joins with the caecum of the large intestine is the appendix. Infection
in the appendix is the cause of appendicitis. Pain starts around the navel, after
sometime that moves downward on the right side. Loss of appetite, vomiting.
and constipation are the symptoms of appendicitis. In this situation, a physician
should be consulted. If the situation demands. patient should be taken to the
hospital and the appendix should be removed by surgery. If the infection of
appendix is severe, it can burst and may be fatal.

(f) Worm related diseases: Worms live in the body as parasites. The human
body is a host for different kinds of worms. Round worms, thread worms, and
tape worms live in the human intestine as parasites. Abdominal pain, weakness,
indigestion, feeling of uneasiness in the abdomen, nausea, insomnia, loss of
appetite, pale face, anemia, swelling of hand and legs, and enlarged abdomen,
are the symptoms of worm related diseases. When an infant suffers from fever,
worms may come out not only with the stool but also from the nose or mouth.
Through pathological examination of stool, the presence of worms can be
ascertained. After being ensured about the presence of eggs of the worms,
treatment should be followed according to the advice of the physician.

Food substances become infected by flies which can lead to people being affected by
worm. Worms spread out from infected food. Preventive measures are as follows -
eating raw fruits only after proper washing, washing hands properly before cating,
using sanitary latrines, not walking bare footed, not eating semi-cooked food.

2023
2025

(g) Diarrhoea : If anyone suffer from loose motion at least three times a day,
this is the symptom of diarrhoea. Though people of all ages suffer from
diarrhoea, the condition of infants deteriorates more quickly. Water and salt
leave the patient's body. As water decreases, the patient becomes weak. So,
shortage of salt and water is noticed. At that time if proper treatment is not
ensured, the patient may even die.

Frequent loose motion and vomiting, feeling of thirst, dried up mouth and
tongue. shrinking of skin, sunken eyes ete. are the symptoms of diarrhoea. In this
situation the patient may not want any food or drink, When the child cries, the
crown of the skull goes down. The child slowly becomes weak.

This disease spreads more quickly in cases such as: drinking impure water,
eating of stale and dirty foods, using unclean utensils, intake of food with dirty
hands.

Ifthe symptoms of diarrhoea are noticed, then patient should be given oral saline
as early as possible. Nowadays, oral saline, prepared by Institute of Diarrhoea
Research Centre, is available in the market. The instruction of making oral saline
is written on the packet. Oral saline can also be prepared in the house. You have
already learnt how to prepare oral saline at home. Rice saline is one of the recent
inventions. Rice saline is prepared by mixing 50 gm of rice powder and one
pinch of salt with | litre of water. Remember the following instructions at the
time of using oral saline, such as : continue to drink oral saline ull diarrhoea
stops, do not stop taking saline even if the patient vomits, allow breast feeding
for infants. Patients should be given normal food regularly. After recovery the
patient should be supplied extra diet for at least a week.

Diarrhoea may be caused by germs like virus, bacteria or protozoa. Rota virus is
one of the main causes of diarrhoea. 82% of death due to rota virus occurs in
deprived poor countries. The percentage of death is high in poor countries. The
severity of this disease has also been found in developed countries, but death rate
is comparatively less.

| Activity: Prepare oral saline in a group. Prepare a poster on writing the —
_ necessity of taking oral saline and present it before the class.

0 Bilogy
@ Exercise

What are the mineral nutrients of plants?

How many essential mineral nutrients do plants use?
What is a food pyramid?

Why does anemia occur?

Why does night blindness occur?

oe eRe

1. Describe the structure of a tooth with diagram.
2. Write down the characteristics of a balanced diet?

1. Which of the following nutrients serve in a plant as a macronutrient?
a. Zine b. Chlorine
¢. Boron d. Potassium

2. Chlorosis is caused by—
i. nitrogen deficiency

ii. sulfur deficiency

iii. iron deficiency
Which one of the following is correct?

a. i&ii b, i & iii

ce. i & tii dia & ti
Read the stem and answer the questions number 3 and 4.

Five years old Sanjana can see all the writings in herbook. But at night she
can not see the writing clearly.
3. Which vitamin deficiency does Sanjana have?
a) vitamin ‘A’ b) vitamin “B*
¢) Vitamin *C’ d) vitamin “D’

225
4. To prevent this disease which food should Sanjana eat ?

1) liver
ii) carrot
iii) Mola fish
Which one is correct?
aid&ii b)i & tii
cj & iii bi, & i

Creative questions:

1. Dr. Raihan spends most of the time in the laboratory. So, his body weight is
increasing. On the other hand, his younger brother Jahir is a regular player of the
National Football Team. For that he has to play and take exercise daily.

a) What type of food is the source of nitrogen?

b) What do you mean by high protein? Explain it.

¢) Which food should be in much quantity in Jahir’s food chart? Explain the reason.

d) Which type of food is not applicable for Dr. Raihan that is included in Jabhir's
food chart? With analysis give your opinion.

2. Irfan Ali observed that the leaves of the grass in his garden were becoming yellow,
and the leaves, flowers and buds of flowering plants were falling off plants. To solve these
problems, he asked forhelp from a horticulturist, and the horticulturist suggested
that Irfan Ali apply some essential nutrient elements in his garden.

a, Whatis micronutrient?

b. What are the essential elements for plants? Explain.

e, Explain the causes of the problems found with the grass in Irfan's garden.
d, Evaluate the suggestions given by the horticulturist.

Forma-16, Biology Class-9-10
Chapter Six
Transport in Organisms

Transport is an essential system, functioning all the time in all the living
organisms, In plants, the conduction of water and minerals is as important as the
translocation of food in thera. Translocation of water and minerals absorbed
from the soil and taken to the leaves is as essential as the translocation of food
produced in the leaves to the different parts of the plant body. Transportation of
substances in a human body is not the same as in a plant body, but both follow
the same rules of Physics. Transport systems in both plant and human bodies are
discussed in this chapter.

2025
£23

® At the end of the chapter, we will be able to-

explain the concepts and necessity of transport in plants;

explain the plant and water relationship;

explain the absorbing system of water and mineral substances and their
necessity in plants;

describe the translocation of substances produced through the process of
photosynthesis;

explain the conduction system of water and mineral substances and their
necessity in plants;

explain the concept and significance of the process transpiration;

analyse the role of factors in controlling the rate of transpiration:

evaluate that transpiration is a necessary evil;

perform an experiment to demonstrate transpiration in the plants;

explain the concept of transportation in the human body;

explain the function of the components of blood:

explain the characteristics of different blood groups:

choose blood depending upon the blood group characteristics:

describe the rules of blood donation and social commitment;

describe the process of blood transportation in the human body;

describe the structure and the function of heart:

analyse the adaptation of the heart's structure with its activity:

analysis the role of blood pressure in blood circulation;

explain the ideal blood pressure;

describe types of cholesterol, its range. usefulness and its risks for health;
analyse the role of cholesterol in blood circulation;

describe the causes and effects of irregularities in blood;

analyse the symptoms, causes, remedy and prevention of diseases relating
to the heart;

analyse how to keep the heart healthy;

measure the pulse rate and blood pressure at rest and after exercise and
analyse them in these two situations;

measure blood pressure and pulse rate accurately;

one has to be aware of keeping the heart sound and will be able to make
others aware.
6.1 Plant and Water Relationship

Another name of water is life. Life cannot subsist without water, We know that
protoplasm is the physical basis of life. 90% of this protoplasm is water, This is
why water is called the fluid of life. If protoplasm is devoid of water, it become
constricted and may die. Not only that all the metabolic reactions that usual
occur in a plant will be ceased in deficiency of water. The important uses of
water in a plant body are:

|. There is no substitute for water in maintaining the living nature of protoplasm.
In order to keep a cell with constricted protoplasm, water supply must be
ensured.

2. It is necessary to ascertain the supply of water in necessary amount for keeping
transpiration and photosynthesis running. This is why irrigation is to be
maintained for large plants in the dry season.

3. Water is an important solvent. The significance of water in many metabolic
reactions is Immense.

4. Water plays important roles in the cellular growth of plant and in their movement.
Now, the question arises, from where and how the plants do obtain water for the
maintenance of life? Plants mainly absorb water through their roots from the
soil. Absorption is accomplished with the coordination of three processes,
imbibition, diffusion and osmosis.

1) Imbibition: If a piece of dry wood is placed in water, it will absorb some
water in it, We know that dry or half-dry colloidal substances absorb liquid, This
is why the piece of wood has absorbed the water. This process is called
imbibition. The substances such as cellulose, starch, gelatin etc. are hydrophilic.
When they come in contact with water, they absorb it, and conversely, they
become constricted when they face deficiency of the liquid. As the cell wall and
protoplasm are colloidal in nature, absorbing water they become swelled up.
This is a unique process for absorbing water.

2) Diffusion: If some incense is poured in a corner of a room, its fragrance is
immediately spread throughout the whole room. The small particles of the

incense are spread in the air. If some sugar is added toa glass of water,
the molecule of sugar immediately spread in the water and the water of the glass
tastes sweet. This process is called diffusion. It is a physical process. The

2025
2025

process through which the molecules of any substance are spread from a region
of higher concentration lo a region of lower concentration is called diffusion. Al
a constant temperature and atmospheric pressure, the potential energy of a
substance to diffuse from a solution of higher concentration to a solution of
lower concentration is called its diffusion pressure. Under the same atmospheric
pressure, the difference between the diffusion pressure of a solution and that of
a solvent is called the diffusion pressure deficit. Because of the diffusion
pressure deficit in the mesophyll tissue of a leaf, a cell in deficiency of water
absorbs it from its adjacent cell. The significance of diffusion in the absorption
of water in plants is immense.

@) Individual Activity

Activity: Experiment on the demonstration of diffusion.

Essentials: a small bowl, attar or any incense.

Procedure: To prove the diffusion process by pouring incense into a
bowl, describe the following situation.

3) Osmosis: Do you know what osmosis is? Have you ever observed when your
mother places some raisins in water, the constricted raisins swell up, being
turgid, Have you ever thought of how this happens? Ifyou then place the turgid
raisins in concentrated sugar solution, they again turn constricted, How does this
happen? This is an essential phenomenon. Through the phenomenon, plants
absorb water from the soil. This process can be accomplished in the laboratory
without the involvement of any living cell. If the two solutions of different
concentrations having the same solvent and solute are separated by a selectively
permeable membrane, the concentration of both the solutions will soon be equal.
When two solutions of different concentrations with the same solute and solvent
are separated with a selectively permeable membrane, the solvent flows from its
solution of lower concentration to the solution ef higher concentration.
Movement of the solvent through a selectively permeable membrane from a
solution of lower concentration to a solution of higher concentration is called
osmosis. Osmosis is usually the diffusion of solvents because in this case where
the amount of solvent is proportionally higher (i.¢ less density of solution) flows
in the direction where the amount of solvent is proportionally less (i, e more
density of solution). In other words, osmosis is the flow of solvent from high
density of solvent to low density of solvent. Since it is not possible for solute to
cross the selectively permeable membrane.
® Individual Activity

Activity: Experiment to demonstrate osmosis from cell to cell.

Essentials: A piece of potato, blade, petridish, water, and sugar,
Procedure: Prepare a potato osmoscope, and by pouring in the sugar
beverage, demonstrate osmosis.

6.2 Absorption of water and mineral salts

In plants, the absorption of water and mineral salts occur through different
processes. For the convenience of our discussion, we will learn about water
absorption first.

(a) Absorption of water: Plants generally. absorb capillary water from the soil
through their roots. The diffusion pressure deficit in a cell of a leaf is developed
because of transpiration, and then water from the adjacent cell moves towards
the cell. In the same way diffusion pressure deficit is developed in the second
cell and water moves to it from the adjacent cell. This way, a continuous diffusion
pressure deficit is extended up to root hair and a suction force is developed. Because
of this suction force, capillary water continues to enter the cell root hair. Water
enters the root hair cell through the process of osmosis and diffusion. This way,

water is taken up into the root hairs and moves through the cortex tissue.
Endoderma! cell

et Any!
Epicermig Endedermis Conducting system
Figure : 6.01 Absorption and conduction of water

2025
2025

This water movement is called cell to cell osmosis. Then, water moves [rom the
cortex tissue to the endodermis, the pericycle, and finally into the vascular
bundles. Water. having entered into the vascular bundles, is taken up and flow
laterally through the xylem tissue, The water flowing through different branches
and branchlets of the plant, ultimately, reaches the leaves and this is
accomplished by the active involvement of osmosis and transpiration.

(b) Absorption of mineral salts: Most plants absorb some mineral salts with
water along. Though some salts are absorbed through the root hair, the
meristematic region of the tip of root functions as the main region of absorbing
mineral salts. Mineral salts are absorbed in the form of ions. Absorption of salts
is done in two ways, passive absorption and active absorption.

1) Passive absorption: Salt absorption in this way is accomplished through the
root hairs of plants with the process of imbibition and osmosis, and no metabolic
energy is required for it.

2) Active absorption: Active absorption is the absorption of ions with the help
of metabolic energy produced in the cells.

6.2.1 Translocation in plants: Translocation in plants represents the movement
or flow of water and mineral salts and of the food produced in the leaves.
We know that water and mineral salts are taken up the stem through the vessels
of the xylem tissue. Scientists think that the force produced by transpiration,
capillary action and root pressure causes the cell sap to reach the leaves of
plants, In this way water reaches the leaves, and food is produced there. Then
the phloem tissue takes active part in the translocation of food produced by
photosynthesis. The food is translocated through the sieve tubes of the phloem
tissue. Different organic compounds in plants move through phloem tissue at the
same time in opposite directions. The compounds in the lower region flow
downwards and compounds synthesized in the upper region [low upwards and
the substances synthesized in the middle region flow in both directions.
Necessity of translocation in plants
Movement or transportation of water and mineral salts in plants is called
translocation in plants. All scientists agree with the necessity of translocation of

water and mineral substances in plants. Now, the matter of consideration is that
the water and mineral substances, that are to be used, must be taken to the places
where the reactions will occur, This is why translocation of water and mineral
salts is very important. Water and mineral salts being absorbed through the root
hair go through the vessels of the xylem tissue, cross the cortex region, by
osmosis and gradually reach the leaves with the flow of transpiration. Food is
produced in the leaves. The food produced in the leaf reaches the different
regions of a plant through sieve tubes of the phloem tissue. If the flow in the
xylem vessels or phlocm sieve tubes is blocked, for any reason, the plant would
die. So it is to be said that translocation is very important for plant life.

Translocation of water and minerals: We have already acquired some ideas
about osmosis and diffusion. Plants absorb water from the soil through process
osmosis. [his is accomplished mainly through the root hairs. Plants also absorb
mineral nutrients from the soil, though the process of absorbing water and the
process of absorbing mineral salts are quite different. You will learn more about
it at a higher level of education. Water and mineral salts inside the cell are
collectively known as cell sap. Now, we will learn how the cell sap from the root
reaches the top most branches and leaves of a plant.

Ascent of sap: Roots absorb water and mineral salts, The cell sap ascends
slowly upwards. Simultaneously, the lateral translocation of cell sap also occurs.
Translocation of cell sap is categorized into two steps: 1) the arrival of soil water
and mineral salts from root hairs to the vascular tissue of the root and
2) translocation from vascular bundle of the root to leaves. At first
osmosis, diffusion and suction from transpiration play an important role in the
absorption and translocation of water and mineral salts. The water and the
mineral substances absorbed by root hairs move to the adjacent cells by the
process of osmosis. From there they move again to the next cell. In this way,

f025
water and mineral substances reach the vascular bundle of the root, and
ultimately, reach the mesophyll tissue of leaves through the vascular bundle of
the stem.

@) Individual Activity

Activity: Experiment to demonstrate the
ascent of sap in a plant.

Essentials: Peporomia plant, bottle of
glass, water and safranin or red ink.
Procedure: Take some water in a
glass bottle, Add some drops of
safranin or red ink to it. Place a living
Peporomia plant in the bottle in such a
way that its roots are submerged into
water. Now place the bottle somewhere
for a few hours and observe the result.

Figure: 6.02 Ascent of Sap in
a plant

6.2.3 Translocation of the substances produced in photosynthesis: You have
learned earlier that plants absorb water through osmosis. The water is
conducted to the leaves even to the top most regions of a very tall plant. These
leaves utilize water for photosynthesis. In the presence of light and chlorophyll,
water taken from the soil reacts with CO, taken from the air and produces
carbohydrate. The food produced in this way is conducted to different parts of a
plant. Every cell of a plant derives its energy to perform metabolic activities by
using food through respiration. After the completion of deriving energy through
respiration, the remaining food is stored in the plant.The food is usually stored
in stem (potatoes), root (sweet potatoes), leaf (aloes) and im different fruits and
seeds. Now, we will study how the food produced in photosynthesis is conducted
to different regions of a plant body.

Forma-17, Biology Class-9-10
130 Biology

Phioem translocation: As the leaves and the roots grow away from each other,
there must be a rapid and effective transport system in between them for the
conduction of food. This is done by sieve tubes of phloem. Phloem is an
important bundles of vascular bundle. We know that there are xylem bundles and
phloem bundles in a vascular bundle. In the phloem bundle, there are sieve
tubes, companion cells, phloem parenchyma and bast fibers. A sieve tube is a
kind of thin walled living cell without a nucleus. Being positioned longitudinally
side by side, they form a net-like structure. The septa in between them, missing
in some places, develop sieve shaped forms, This is why food substances can
easily move from cell to cell. In winter, these openings are blocked because of
the deposition of the chemical substance callose, and thus the movement of food
is inhibited. At the advent of summer, the callose is degraded and the movement
of food resumes.

6.2.4 Transpiration

Life cannot be imagmed without water. Plants mostly absorb water they require
through their roots. They use a very little part of the absorbed water for their
metabolic activities. The remaining part of the water is released to the
atmosphere m the form of vapour. The physiological process by which water is
earried through plants and then released to the atmosphere in the form of vapour
through aerial parts, is called transpiration. On the basis of aerial parts through
which this process occurs, transpiration is categorized into three divisions:
stomatal transpiration, cuticular transpiration and lenticular transpiration.

1) Stomatal transpiration: There are special
types of openings with two guard cells in the
leaves, young stems. sepals, and petals of
flowers. These openings are called stomata
(singular no. stoma). 95% of the total
transpiration in a plant occurs through the
stomata.

2) Cuticular transpiration: There is a layer
of cutin on the epidermal layers of a plant,
especially on the upper and lower surface of
every leaf. This layer is called the cuticle. Some water, when evaporated, is
released through the cuticle. The process is called cuticular transpiration.

Figure: 6.03 An open anda close stomata

2025
£23

3) Lenticular transpiration: After the occurrence of secondary growth in
plants, the airy ageregation of cells that functions as a pore (called lenticel)
develop on the rapture bark of some plants. The cells aggregated around a
lenticel are loosely fitted and water from the inside can be released through it.
This is called lenticular transpiration,

Lenticel
Complementary cell
Epidermis

Figure: 6.04 A Lenticel

Through transpiration, as excess water escapes through evaporation, a suction
force develops causing the root to absorb water. This process depends on many
factors. They are roughly grouped into two: a) external factors and b) internal
factors.

(a) External factors: The factors which affect transpiration from outside of the
plant body are called external factors. They include:

(1) Temperature: The rate of transpiration fluctuates with the changes of
temperature. Water can easily be vapourized at high temperature and thus
transpiration is accelerated. The water-holding capacity of air increases if the
temperature goes up. As a result, transpiration proceeds faster. If the
temperature goes down, the rate of transpiration declines.

(2) Relative humidity: The ratio of the amount of water vapour in the air of the
atmosphere and the amount of water yapour that the air can hold at a given
temperature is its relative humidity, For instance, the alr may be dry in spite of
having high water vapour because the air may have a high water vapour holding
capacity. Conversely, in spite of the presence of low amount of water vapour in
atmosphere, the atmosphere may be humid if there is low water vapour holding
capacity in the air. When relative humidity is low, the air remains
unsaturated, and can retain more water vapour. If the relative humidity is high,
the air loses its water vapour holding capacity. When the relative humidity is

low, the rate of transpiration increases and when high, the rate of transpiration
declines.

3) Light: In presence of light, stomata open, and so, the rate of transpiration
increases, In the dark, the process is ceased because the stomata are closed, The
increase or decrease of stomata size occur due to the fluctuation of light. Asa
result the rate of transpiration also fluctuate. Light also affects transpiration by
increasing the temperature of the plant.

4) Wind: Because of transpiration, the air around the plant becomes moist, and
causes the rate of transpiration to slow. When wind removes the saturated air, the
rate of transpiration increases. With the wind, the leaves are swung and a kind of
pressure is exerted on the stomata and so, water vapour comes out through them
at a high rate. This is why with the change of wind velocity, the rate of
transpiration also changes. If the atmospheric pressure rises, evaporation declines
and the rate of transpiration also decreases. Again, at low atmospheric pressure,
evaporation increases, and so, the rate of transpiration increases.

b) Internal factors

1) Stomata: The rate of transpiration varies with the number, volume,
structure and arrangement of the stomata.

2) Number of leaf: The rate of transpiration varies with the number, volume,
structure and arrangement of the leaves.

3) Surface area of mesophyll: If the volume of leaves is high, the rate of
transpiration will also be high. The same way, if the volume of leaf is low, rate of
transpiration will be low.

4) Volume of the aerial parts of the plant: If the total volume with all the aerial
parts (including the leaves) and stem of a plant is increased, the rate of
transpiration will be higher.

The presence of cuticle, area of spongy parenchyma etc. also change the rate of
transpiration.

2025
2025

Activity: Prove with an experiment that water is released as water vapour
from a plant through transpiration.
Essentials: A fresh potted plant, a glass bell jar or a cellophane bag,

thread or clip and water.

Procedure: First, the plant with the
pot should be placed on a table and
required amount of water should be
poured in the pot. Now, a branch
of the plant (with some leaves covered
with a cellophane bag) should be
clipped or tied with thread or covered
with a bell jar. The precaution should
be taken that vapour cannot come
out, or aur cannot get in. The pot in
this stage should be kept for an hour,

Observation: After an hour, it will
be found that there are water drops
on the inner surface of the
cellophane bag and the whole bag
would become damp. How has
that happened?

Conclusion: As there is no scope for water to get into the cellophane bag,
it is clear that the water drops are escaping from the leaves. So, we see that a
plant releases water in vapour form through its aerial parts.

Figure: 6.05 Test of transpiration

Precautions:

1)The plant on the pot should be fresh and living.

2)The opening of the cellophane bag should be tightly tied so that no air can
get in or come out.

Transpiration is a necessary evil

Scientists have agreed on the significance of transpiration. The metabolic
activities of a living plant cell are dependent on this process. Because of
transpiration a suction force is developed in the xylem vessel. With this suction
force, the absorbed water and mineral salts by root hair of a plant are conducted
to the leaves. If the force decreases, the absorption of water will be decreased
and the metabolic activities along with the production of food will be slow. In
the mesophyll of the leaf, a diffusion pressure deficit is developed because of
transpiration and helps the absorption of water. A plant keeps the teraperature in
the cells of leaves within a certain range by continuously reducing the thermal
energy absorbed by the mesophyll.

On the contrary, though transpiration contributes many uses to a plant, it also
plays some harmful roles. For instance, if the rate of loss of water is greater than
the rate of its absorption, this will cause deficiency of water and minerals in the
plant. As a result, the plant may die. If water is deficient in the soil. absorption
will be very little, though transpiration will continue as before. To deal with this,
nature causes many plants to shed leaves in winter. Because of the lacking of
transpiration, the required diffusion pressure deficit will not develop and as a
result the rate of osmosis will be slow.

So, it can be said that transpiration is an essential activity for a plant though it
causes some harms to it. For the contrary characteristic. the scientist Curtis
designated the process transpiration as a ‘necessary evil’. But as a whole,
transpiration has continued in spite of its having some negative effects. because
it enables plants to survive.

6.3 Blood circulation in Human Body

Blood is the source of vitality. Blood circulates throughout the whole body
through blood vessels and distributes oxygen and nutrients. Se, the cells remain
active and alive. The system, through which the blood transports to organs and
the different parts of the body, is called the blood circulatory system. The
distribution of nutrients and oxygen throughout the body and the removal of
body wastes is performed by this system.

2023
2025

The flow of blood in human is limited to the inside of the blood vessels and

heart, it never comes outside. This type of circulatory system is called a closed
circulatory system. Transporting blood throughout the whole body requires only
one minute or less. The advantages of this circulatory system are (1) Blood
reaches different organs directly, (2) can control the flow of blood to a particular
organ by changing its diameter, and the distribution can be adjusted depending
on demand, (3) blood goes around the whole body and returns to the heart quickly.
Blood circulatory system is very much special than other system but structurally
it is normal.

There are two types of circulatory systems, such as, (1) Blood circulatory
system. It consists of the heart, arteries, veins and capillaries. (2) Lymphatic
system. It consists of lymph, lymphatic ducts or lacteals.

6.3.1 Blood : Blood is a viscous, slightly alkaline and salty fluid. Blood
elreulates through the heart, arteries, arterioles, veins, venioles and capillaries.
Due to the presence of haemoglobin in red blood cells. blood appears red. Blood
originates from bone marrow.

Components of Blood : Blood is a type of liquid connective tissue. It has
mainly two components, Plasma and Blood cells.

(a) Plasma : The colourless fluid part of plasma constitutes about 55% volume
of the whole blood. The main component of plasma is water. A small amount of
protein, organic substances and a small portion of inorganic salts are dissolved
in it. The substances which are present are as sila

(1) Protei, such as, albumin, globulin, ©
fibrinogen (2) glucose (3) small ry ©'o
droplets of fats (4) mineral salts (5) 0.5 osx
vitamins (6) hormones (7) antibodies o,0°2 ° Sas 6
(8) waste products such as carbon }
dioxide. urea, uric acid etc. It also © ra)

contains a small amount of sodium ) ©. °o 0.0 © Sy
chloride, sodium bicarbonate and mv OO |
amino acids. The food substances Figure: 6.06 Blood component (microscopic view),
which we eat are digested and absorbed hed — ae. oa theese aan: —
by the intestinal wall and mixed with arrows,

blood, then transported all over the body. The cells absorb the nutrients, repair
the worn out tissues and help in growth.
(b) Blood cells: Blood is made
of three types of cells (a) Red
blood cells or erythrocytes |

(b) White blood cells or
leucocytes and (c) Platelets or
thrombocytes. Though all of these are
cell, in comparison with the floated
particles in blood plasma these were
called blood corpuscles. Then the
microscope was not well developed like
now. This name is still now accepted.

(i) Red blood cells or erythrocytes: Among the three blood cells the red
blood cells are huge in number and play an important role for the
transportation of oxygen required for respiration. Red blood cells are formed in
bone marrow. The average viability of a red blood cell is 120 days. The red blood
cell is non-nucleated, and appears mostly like circles and biconcave discs. There
are approximately 5 million red blood cell present per cubic milliliter of an
adult male. This is 500 times more
than that of white blood cells.

The amount of red blood cells is
comparatively less in females. Red

corpuscles

Figure : 6.07 : Various types of blood
cells

blood cells in infants are comparatively

high in number. Red blood cells are
destroyed at every moment and equal

amount of cells are produced again.

Haemoglobin in red blood cells Figure : 6.08 : Red blood cells
transports oxygen as oxyheamoglobin and also carbon dioxide.

Haemoglobin : Haemoglobin is a type of coloured pigment. Blood appears red
because of its presence in red blood cells. If the number of red blood cells
isnot adequate, then the symptoms of anemia are noticed, In Bangladesh alraost
two thirds of the population suffer from this disease. To get rid of this disease it
is necessary to take balanced diet.

f025
(ii) White blood cells: White blood cells are big and irregular in shape, contain
a nucleus and fewer in number than red blood corpuscles. There are 4-10 thousand
white blood cells per cubic milliliter of human blood. White blood cells are
produced in red bone marrow and lymphatic glands. Their average viability is

1-15 days.
G

“jogs
ODE

Figure 6.09 : Destruction of germ by white blood cells
in the process of fagocytosis

They are colourless (without haemoglobin). That’s why it is called White Blood
Cell or WBC. White blood cells can change their shape like amoeba and
can move from one place to another. It can enter into the tissue via the wall of
blood capillery. If the body attacked by germ from outerside then the number of
white cell increases rapidly. It kill germs by the phagocytosis process. In
mammals among the blood cell, only white blood cell contain DNA.
Types: according to structure and presence of granules in the cytoplasm, white
blood cells can be divided into two types: agranulocyte and granulocyte.
1. Agranulocyte: The cytoplasm of
white blood cells are without granules
and transparent. Again agranulocyte >
white blood cells are of two types-
Lymphocyte and Monocytes. They are
produced in the lymphnodes, tonsil,
spleen etc. Lymphocytes are small cells
with large nuclei, Monocytes are large at aS
cells with small oval or kidney-shaped Neutrophil Eosinophil Basophil
nuclei. Lymphocytes kill the germs that Figure 6.10 Various types of white
enter the body by creating antibodies blood cells
and thus increasing immunity power, On the other hand, monocytes kill germs
in the phagocytosis process.
Forma-18, Biology Class-9-10

White blood cells

Lymphocoyte Monocoyte

2. Granulocyte: Granulocytes have cytoplasm with slightly stamed granules.
According to the size of the nucleus, granulocyte white blood cells are
categorized into three types: Neutrophils, Eosinophils and Basophils.
Neutrophils kill germs in the phagocytosis process. Eosinophils and basophils
prevent allergy in the body by secreting a chemical named histamine. Basophil
secretes heparin and inhibits blood clot formation inside blood vessels.

White blood cells engulf the germs by spreading pseudopodia. This
process is named phagocytosis. The dead white blood cells turn into pus.
If white blood cells in the blood increases excessively, leukemia or blood
cancer occurs. White blood cells act as a guard, destroying germs by the process
of phagocytosis and produceing antibodies.

(iii) Platelets or Thrombocytes: Platelets aré small in size, colourless and
round, oval or rod shaped. Platelets have stained granular non-nucleated
cytoplasm that contains cell organelles like golgi body, and mitochondria.
Somebody opines that these are not a full cell they are the fragmented portion
of the large cells of bone marrow. There are approximately 2.5 million platelets
per cubic milliliter of blood. The number of platelet comparatively hight in ill body.
They originate in the bone marrow. Their
average viability is 5-10 days. They help in
coagulation or blood clotting. When the
endothelial surface of a blood vessel is 0)
injured, the platelets there take irregular
shapes and release a chemical substance
called snrpmiboplasiing. | aie tatisforne Figure 6.11: Platelet - ‘d dima
prothrombine, the protein in blood, into its shape

thrombin. Thrombin then acts to transform fibrinogen, also present in plasma, into
fibrin which helps to clot blood. Fibrin is a kind of insoluble protein that can create

thread like strands very quickly. It coagulates blood in the injured place and stops
bleeding. However, coagulation is a complex process where various chemical
substances as well as vitamin K and calcium ions remain invelved.

Lf blood does not contain the right amount of platelets, blood does not clot easily.
This may lead the patient to a life threatening situation.

2025
£23

@) Individual Activity

Activity: Draw this table in your notebook and fill it in groups. Note the
differences between Red blood cells and White blood cells.

Characteristics Red Blood cells White Blood cells

(a) Nucleus

(b) Shape

(c) Haetaoglobin
(d) Number

(e) Functions

Functions of blood
Blood is an important component of body. Blood performs many different
functions:

(1) Oxygen transport: Red blood cells transports oxygen as oxyhaemoglobin

to the cells.

(2)Removal of carbon dioxide: Due to the chemical reaction in the tissue,
carbon dioxide is produced. Carbon dioxide is transported in the form of sodium
bicarbonate dissolved in the plasma, It carries carbon dioxide [rom the tissue to
the lungs which is then expelled during expiration.

(3) Transportation of digested food: It provides plasma, ghicose, amino acid,
and fat granules to the cell.

(4) Balancing of temperature condition: Combustion done constantly in body.
Heat is produced in the body tissues, especially in the muscles and liver. As a
result, the temperature varies in different organs but blood helps maintaining
uniform body temperature by distributing it throughout the body.

(3) Elimination of waste products: Blood carries all the waste products and
eliminates as urea, uric acid and carbon dioxide through different organ.

(6) Hormone transport: Hormone is a bio-chemical substance which is
produced in ductless glands. It mixes with the blood directly and is circulated to

the different organs of the body. It helps in different important biological
processes.
(7) Prevention of Diseases: Some types of white blood cells attack and engulf
germs by the process of phagocytosis, thus preventing the body from the attack
of germs. It mcreases the resistance power against diseases by producing
antibodies and antigens.

(8) Blood clotting: If there is a wound at any part of the body, the clotting of
blood heals the wound, preventing excess loss of blood.

6.3.2 Blood group

You hear that blood is necessary for a critical or dying patient. His or her blood
group is B. You frequently see this type of advertisement on television. But what is
a blood group? Why is it necessary to know about the blood group? Through many

research and observation it is found that red blood cells contain A and B
antigens and plasma has a and b antibodies. Blood can be classified into different
groups depending upon the presence of these antigens and antibodies. This is called
the blood group. Scientist Karl Landsteiner, i 1901, first classified and named
human blood and placed it into four groups: A, B, AB and O. Normally the blood
sroup of a person remains the same and unchanged throughout the whole life.
The different kinds of antigens and antibodies in different blood groups is shown in
the table below-

Blood group _ Antigen (in red blood cells) Antibodies (in plasma)
A A b

B B a

AB A,B No antibodies

) Neither a,b

We have observed the presence of different antigens and antibodies within the
blood. On this basis we can explain blood group in this way. For Example -
1.Group A: Blood possesses antigen A and anti-B antibody (in short b antibody).
2.Group B : Blood possesses antigen B and anti-A antibody (in short a antibody).
3.Group AB ; Blood possesses antigen A, B and both antibodies are absent.
4.Group 0 : Both antigens are absent and possesses antibody a, b.

If the antigen present in the surface of the red blood cell of a donor comes in
contact with an antibody present in the plasma of the receiver, that can react
with the antigen, causing a potentially fatal situation for the receiver or
patient.

2025
2025

So every individual receiver should be given blood that is compatible. For
example, if your blood group is A (1.c. surface of the red blood cell contains
antigen A) and your friend’s blood group is B (i.e. plasma contains antibody a),
you cannot donate blood to your friend. If you did give him, antigen A in your blood
will react with antibody ain your friend's blood and this can be life-threatening
for him, So compatible blood group should be ensured so that the antibody in the
receiver's blood does not react with the antigen of the donor’s blood. Based on
this principle, a table can be made showing the compatible blood groups.

Recipient

+101 6|/6\'6'6'6 6/6
~/@) |6| |6| [6
~|0\@ 6
«|@ é
+10 6/6/06

-|@| |@

+10 @

-|@

Figure 6.12: Blood group compatibility table

Table : On the basis of the blood group the donor's and recipient's list.

Blood Group Groups to which blood can be donated Groups from which blood can be received
A A, AB A, 0

B B, AB BO

AB AB A, B, AB, 0

Oo A, B, AB,O Oo

From this table you can see that people with O are universal donors. People with
blood group AB can receive the blood from all groups. So. people with blood
group AB are called universal recipients,

The concepts of universal donor or universal recipients is not very acceptable in
modern medical science. It is because although the ABO blood group system is
considered to be the most important factor for the classification of blood group
based on antigens, there may be numerous other antigens which can cause
problems in many cases. For example. Rhesus factor is one kind of antigen. A
person is said to be rh positive if this factor is present in his blood and if not, is
called rh negative. In case of blood transfusion, if the rh factor does not match,
the recipient or the patient’s condition may deteriorate. So the rhesus factor must
be checked along with ABO blood group compatibility. Thus if the rhesus factor
is taken inte consideration, the blood groups are A+, A-, B+ , B- , AB+, AB-, O+
and O-. As the negative blood group does not contain rhesus factor antigen, it
can be given to people with positive blood group but positive blood group
cannot be given to the negative ones. Besides there are also many more antigen
based minor group in the blood. For avoiding complications of this minor blood
group ABO grouping and Rh typing as well as cross-matching test is mandatory
before blood transfusion. In addition, screening of donor blood is inaportant to
ensure that the recipient is not infected with a serious germ infected disease
(such as AIDS, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C etc.).

Donation of blood and social responsibilities: Excessive bleeding due to
serious Injury. accident, surgery, natural calamities or fer any other reasons may
lead to the amount of blood decreasing abruptly. Emergency transfusion of
blood is the only way to recover from this. At present blood donation is a
common practice. Emergency can be met by blood transfusion from one person
to another directly, or by using a blood bank. The procedure, in which blood is
given to a person through an intravenous line from an outer source to replace lost
blood, is called blood transfusion. It is an effective measure and can save the
life of a patient. Without examining the blood group and its nature, blood should
not be transfused under any circumstances. Violations may cause different
complexities in a patient and increase the possibility of death. For example -
coagulation of red blood corpuscles, decomposition, jaundice and elimination of
red blood corpuscles (haemoglobin) with urine.

On emergency basis blood is required for people wounded in accidents. Blood
has no substitute and in this situation a lot of blood may be necessary. By
collecting blood from others, this emergency crisis can be met. For this the
cooperation of the general public is necessary, We must keep in mind that it is
our social responsibility. To donate blood to others is a noble task. It causes no
harm to the donor. A healthy person can donate 450 milliliter of blood.

2023
2025

20 million of red blood corpuscles are produced in every second in his body. A

healthy person can donate blood every 4 months. This amount of blood loss will
not create any harm to the donor.

Nowadays, to inspire blood donation, different programmes are arranged. For
example, blood donation on a particular day or occasion. Fear and false
conception regarding blood donation is decreasing day by day. Now people are
more conscious and eager to donate blood or to receive blood in emergencies.

6.4 Structure and function of Heart

6.4.1 Structure of Heart

The heart is a triangular shaped, hollow, muscular pumping organ. It is situated in the
left side between the two lungs. The heart consists of special involuntary muscles. It
is surrounded by a thin membrane named the pericardium. The heart wall consists of
three layers: (1) Epicardium (2) Myocardium and (3) Endocardium.

(1) Epicardium: Mainly it consists of
connective tissue. This layer is
covered with epithelial tissue. Fat
bodies are scattered on it.

Superior vena cave

(2) Myocardium: This layer is in
between the epicardium and
endocardium. It consists of strong
involuntary muscles.

(3) Endocardium : This is the inner
most layer. The chambers of the
heart are surrounded by the Shen

endocardium. This layer also covers Figure :.6.13 Human Heart

the valves. The inner part of the heart is hollow and four-chambered. The upper
chambers are the right and left auricle or atrium and the lower chambers are the
night and left ventricles. The atria are comparatively thin walled and the
venticle walls are muscular and thick. The two atria and ventricles are separated
by inter auricular and the inter ventricular septum respectively.

Left ventricle
The aperture between the two atria (singular-atrium) and ventricles are guarded
by valves. The right auriculo ventricular aperture guarded by a tricuspid valve is
made up of three flaps. Similarly the left atrium and ventricle is guarded by a
bicuspid valve made up of two flaps. The opening of the aorta and the
pulmonary artery is guarded by valves called semilunar valves, which allow the
transport of blood in one direction and prevents the back flow of blood.

6.4.2 Circulation of blood through the heart
We have learned earlier that the heart acts like a pump. The heart works by

contraction and relaxation. The continuous contraction and relaxation transports
blood throughout the whole body.

Contraction of atrinm

Relaxation of venincle

t (a) Diastole of atrium (b) Systole of atrium 7

Contraction of ventricle

(ce) Systole of ventricle

(d) Diasiole of ventricle
Figure : 6.14 Internal structure of heart and blood circulation
The contraction of heart is called the systole, and the relaxation of heart is called
the diastole. A complete contraction (systole) and relaxation (diastole) of the
heart constitutes a heart beat.
Due to the relaxation of atria (auricles) the blood enters the heart from different
parts of the body. such as— deoxygenated blood from the superior vena cava
enters the right atrium. At the same time, the oxygenated blood enters to the left
atrium through the pulmonary veins from the lungs.

f025
The walls of the two atrium contract and then the muscles of the ventricle relax.
As a result the tricuspid valve situated between the right sino auricular
ventricular apertures opens. So, the deoxygenated blood from the right auricle
enters into the right ventricle. At the same time, the left sino auricular ventricular
aperture, guarded by the bicuspid valve, opens. Then oxygenated blood enters
the left ventricle from the left auricle. During this period the left and right
auriculo ventricular apertures are closed by their tricuspid and bicuspid valves.
So, blood of the ventricle cannot return to the atrium.

When the two ventricles relax, deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle
passes through the pulmonary artery towards the lungs. Here the blood becomes
purified. At the same time the oxygenated blood leaves the left ventricle through
the aorta towards the body and the opening of both the arteries (aorta and
pulmonary artery) are closed by the semi lunar valves which prevent blood from
returning into the ventricle. Thus successive contraction and relaxation of atrium
and ventricle help in continuous transportation of blood.

Functions of Heart: The heart is the principal organ of the circulatory system.
It helps blood to keep moving. The human heart is divided into four chambers.
In higher animals, the chambers are completely separated. So, oxygenated and
deoxygenated blood do not mix.

6.4.3 Blood vessels

The channels, through which mass flow of the blood occurs, are called blood
vessels. Through these vessels, blood is carried away from the heart to different
parts of the body and back again. According to the size, shape and function
blood vessels are of three types: artery, vein and capillary.

1. Artery: The blood vessels, which usually carry oxygen rich (oxygenated) blood
away from the heart to different organs of the body, are called arteries. The
pulmonary artery is the exception. this exceptional artery carries mostly deoxygenated
or oxygen poor blood (containing high levels of carbon dioxide) from heart to the
lungs. Each artery is made of three layers : (1) Tunica externa - which is made of
connective tissues. (2} Tunica media- the middle layer made of round involuntary
muscles (3) Tunica interna- the innermost layer made of simple endothelial
tissue. The walls of the arteries are elastic and thiclc. The arteries do not have any

Forma-19, Biology Class-9-10
valves and have a narrow passage or lumen. When the heart contracts, the blood
transports through the arteries and arteriole (small arteries) like a wave.

The expansion and contraction of the artery is known as the pulse. The flow of
blood within the artery, and elasticity and contraction and relaxation of the artery
walls are the main causes of pulse, You can feel the pulse by pressing the linger
tips of one hand on the wrist of the other.

‘Capillaries
Artery Vein

Figure: 6.15 various types of blood vessel

2. Vein: The vessels which carry blood from the various organs of the body
towards the heart are called yeins. They are spread all over the body just like
arteries. Veins originate from the capillaries. Numerous capillaries together form
small veniule, Ves and the vena cave open directly into ihe heart. Veins are also
made of three layers, are thin walled, less elastic and have less muscles. The veins
have valves and wider passage or lumen. Veins carry deoxygenated or carbon
dioxide enriched blood. Pulmonary vein is its exception. This vein transports
oxygenated blood from lungs to heart.

Note that both arterial and venous blood contain both oxygen and carbon
dioxide, but their levels are different.

3. Capillaries: The hair like small delicate blood vessels visible in the muscle
fiber, are called blood capillaries. These connect with the smallest artery in one

2025
side and the vein on the other side. All arteries are divided into secondary and
lateral branches and form a fine network of capillaries. Each cell is surrounded by
blood capillaries. The walls of the capillaries are thin. Through this thin layer,

substances dissolved into the blood difluse into the cells.

Capillaries of head and arms

Pulmonary artery {left}
Left

ert Atrium i
Pulmonary vein (right) {if \, Pulmonary vein (left)

Inferior vena cave

Capillaries of body tissue

OM) Oxygen nich blood
| Carbon dioxide rich blood

Capillaries of lega

Figure: 6.16 Human blood circulation

£23
@) Individual Activity

Activity : Determine differences between an artery and vein.

Characteristics Artery Vein
(a) Origin and ending
(b) Direction of blood flow
(c) Nature of blood
(d) Wall
(ec) Lumen or passage
(f) Valve
(g) Location

6.4.4 Blood Pressure

Blood pressure is the pressure of the blood against the wall of the arteries. The
contraction of the heart is called systole. The pressure in the artery during
systolic condition is called the systolic blood pressure. The pressure in the artery
during systolic condition is the highest. Relaxation of the heart is called diastole.
The pressure during the diastole condition is called the diastolic pressure. The

pressure during the expansion of heart or ventricle 1.¢. in the diastole condition
is the least.

Ideal blood pressure: A normal adult’s
blood pressure is generally near about
120/80ml. Blood pressure is expressed in
two numbers, first one is for higher
whereas the second one for the lower. The
blood pressure in the arteries is the
highest during systolic blood pressure and

the ideal range should be 120 or
slightly lower. Figure: 6.17 Observation of pulse

2025
2025

The blood pressure in the arteries decreases during diastole. This is diastolic
blood pressure and the ideal diastolic pressure should be less than 80, In between
the time of two heart beats, this pressure is created, The difference between the
two pressures in the arteries is called pulse pressure. The normal rate of the
pulse, (the heart beat rate) is about 60-100 per minute in an adult at rest.
Normally pulse rate is measured in the radial artery at the wrist. It can also be
measured by ihe blood pressure machine on sphygmomanometer. By observing
the systolic and diastolic pressure with the help of this machine blood pressure
is determined.

@) Individual Activity

Activity: Count the pulse rate of your friend, brother or sister. Count it again
after a short-run, Do you find any change? Explain why this happens.

High blood pressure or Hypertension: High blood pressure is considered to be
a silent killer. According to World Health Organization report, by 2020, stroke
and coronary artery diseases will be the number one life threatening disease. In
the south Asian countries it will break out as an epidemic disease. One of the
main causes of heart disease and stroke is high blood pressure.

What is hypertension?

When the heart pumps blood into the arteries, the blood pressure against the wall
of the blood vessels is called the blood pressure. When blood pressure rises
above the normal pressure, then it is considered as high blood pressure. In a
healthy adult the expected systolic pressure is below 12() mm and the diastolic
pressure is below 80 mm. When a person's blood pressure is consistently high
(systolic > ]40 mm or diastolic > 90 mm), we call it high blood pressure or
hypertension.

Causes of Hypertension and its risk

If the father or mother suffers from blood pressure then the children may be
affected. Those, who suffer from tension or have habit of smoking, have the
probability of hypertension. Increase in body weight. intake of excessive salt
and fatty diet, and lnstory of diabetes and cholesterol of family members are
main causes of this disease. Eclanipsia at the time of child birth can also be a
cause of hypertension in mothers,
Symptoms and signs of Hypertension; Headache, especially at the back of the
head, is the primary symptom of hypertension. Vertigo, neck pain, palpitation
and weakness are also some of the symptoms. Sometimes bleeding from the
nose, sleeplessness or insommia, and fatigue can also indicate symptoms of
hypertension. It is alarming that almost 50% case, no symptom of blood pressure
1s se6n.

Diagnosis: Blood pressure can be examined with a sphygmomanometer. Before
measuring blood pressure the patient should take rest. Blood pressure should be
measured after a gap of at least 15 to 20 minutes.

@) Individual Activity

Activity: Learn the skill of measuring blood pressure and write your friend’s .
blood pressure in the table given below.

| Name of the student | Blood pressure (systole/diastole) Remarks

Prevention of high blood pressure: To prevent high blood pressure, a habit of
eating fresh vegetables and fruits is necessary. Body weight should be controlled
and physical work and exercise should be done regularly. High-fat foods and salt
should be avoided in meals. Smoking must be avoided. If the blood pressure is
out of control then hemorrhage occurs in the brain.

Blood pressure may vary more or less due to health, age, activities and disease. If
the blood pressure is very high, consult a doctor and take medicine regularly.

6.4.5 Cholesterol

Cholesterol is a compound produced from the hydrocarbon cholestane. It is an
important component in animal cells. Cholesterol circulates in the blood as
lipoprotein.

There are three types of lipoprotein in blood :

2025
2025

1, LDL (Low Density Lipoprotem) : This is called bad cholesterol because it
increases the risk of heart disease. Generally our blood contains 70% LDL. This
varies from person to person.

2, HDL (High Density Lipoprotein) ; This is generally called good cholesterol
because it decreases the risk of heart disease.

3. Triglyceride : This cholesterol is in the plasma as fat triglyceride and is created
from animal fat and carbohydrate.

The ideal range of cholesterol in blood is shown in the table below.

Types of cholesterol | Mmol/Litre

LDL <= 1.8
HDL > 15
Triglyceride <1)

Foods such as butter, prawn, oyster, liver of cattle, egg (especially egg yolk).
contain a high amount of cholesterol.

Demerits of high cholesterol: A supply of oxygen and nutrients is essential in
the heart as in all the other organs of our body. Blood circulation is interrupted if
there is an accumulation of fat in the coronary artery of the heart. Consequently,
cardiac muscle is damaged because of a deficiency of oxygen and nutrient. Due
to less circulation of blood pain feels in the chest. This condition is called
angina. Moreover, the possibility of heart disease increases to a great extent
whieen the blood circulation is disturbed because of accumulation of too much fat
on the artery wall.

Functions of cholesterol- Usefulness and its risk: Cholesterol is involved in
constructing the cell membrane and its protection. [t determines permeability,
allowing certain substances to enter the cell. It helps in producing hormones
such as, androgen and estrogen. Cholesterol plays an important role in producing
the hormones of the adrenal glands and in the production of bile. In presence of
sunlight, the cholesterol in the skin prepares vitamin D, which is carried by
blood to the kidneys to be converted into the active form of vitamin D and again
return to blood. Cholesterol is essential for the metabolism of fat soluble
vitamins, such as- vitamin A, D, E and K and for the activities of neurons.
Cholesterol is closely related to the prevention of diseases. However. the
presence of high cholesterol is also related to irregularities of the heart and blood
transportation. Though it is an important component of bile, it is also a waste
product and it is eliminated through the liver. Increased amount of cholesterol
deposit in the gall bladder as sediments. The sediment of cholesterol forms
stones, known as gall bladder stone or gall stone. In addition to cholesterol,
phosphate, and calctum may also form gall stones.

6.4.6 Irregularities in Blood and Bone Marrow-Leukemia

Red blood cells are produced in the liver and the pancreas in the embryonic
stage. It staris developing from bone marrow after the birth of a child. These
mainly supply O,. Ifthe production of RBC 1s interrupted for any reason, and an
abnormal increase of WBC happens, the symptoms of leukemia is detected,

The cancer of blood cells is named leukemia. It occurs because of the abnormal
formation and multiplication of white bleod cells from bone marrow, which
indirectly causes less production of red blood cells and platelets. Though
leukemia is called blood cancer, it is in fact a disease related to the malfunctioning
of blood production. A bone marrow is the worst affected. Low red blood cell
count causes a deficiency of oxygen. As aresult, patients become weak, pale and
have shortness of breath. Due to the deficiency of platelets blood can not
coagulate and bleeding may occur abnormally without any injury from gums,
nose and the other portion of the body. For the same reason, small red spots on
the skin and swelling and inflammation of leg joints may be seen. According to
the World Health Organization (WHO). there are more than fifty types of
leukemia, most of which have high white blood cell count. Though white blood
cells increase in number, in fact, these are cancer cells and are unable to prevent
diseases as these are supposed to. So, a person suffering from leukemia is easily
vulnerable to various diseases. Swollen lymph nodes and a persistent fever may
also occur due to immuno deficiency disorder. Thus the symptom of this disease
shows the inability of almost all the blood cells to function properly. However,
symptoms may vary based on types of leukemia.

Treatment

Now-a-days this disease can be cured if it is diagnosed at an early stage and proper
treatment is ensured, Generally, bone marrow transplantation and chemotherapy
are the major forms of treatment, though treatment may vary based on types of
leukemia. In the past, there was no other alternative but going abroad for better
treatment of this disease. Now there is arrangement of bone marrow
transplantation in Dhaka Medical College Hospital, and chemotherapy ts being
provided in many public or private hospitals of the country.

f025
6.5 Circulatory diseases and their Remedies

(a) Heart Attack: When blood clots in any part of the heart, it stops blood
circulation. This causes the damage of cardiac cells. It results in myocardial
infarction or coronary thrombosis which are commonly known as heart attack.
The number of patients of heart disease (especially coronary heart disease) is
increasing in Bangladesh, Oxygen and nutrients are carried by the blood to all
cells of the body from heart. There are three main blood vessels of the heart that
carry oul ils activities. These are called coronary arteries. Sometimes there is a
deposition of lipids that forms a blockage in the wall of these arteries, which
creates obstacle in blood flow. This causes life threatening heart disease.
Nowadays, not only people aged between 40 to 60, but also many young men
have heart attacks,

The main causes of this disease are being over weight, uncontrolled proportion
of glucose in blood, cating unhealthy diet, such as-, oily food (Biriani, Tehari
etc.), fast food (Burger, Beef or chicken patties etc.), idle life leading, lack of
physical exercise, depression, emotional strain, anxiety, and sadness increase the
risk of this disease at any age.

Symptoms of the diseases : Symptoms of a heart attack are feeling severe chest
pain, particularly pain in mid chest, that does not decrease by taking antacid. The
pain spreads rom the lefi side to all over chest. Pain also spreads towards the neck
and left hand. The patient complains that he or she feels pressure on the chest and
starts sweating severely. Diabetic patients may have a heart attack without any
chest pain, When it is diagnosed, it may be too late. Therefore, a diabetic patient
needs to have regular medical checkup even if they do not face any problem.

Remedy: Do not ignore the situation. Do an E.C.G as early as possible, consult
a doctor and render treatment. Coronary heart disease is a dangerous heart
disease. To keep free from this disease some rules should be followed, so that
blood pressure can be controlled.

- Avoid smoking, do regular exercise like walking.

- Eat sufficient amount of fruits and vegetables.

- Avoid fatty, fied, spicy and fast food.

- Changing of food habit.

Forma-20, Biolagy Class-9-10
(b) Rheumatic fever: Rheumatic fever is a disease brought on by streptococcal
infections such as strep throat, scarlet fever, tonsillitis or middle ear infection, The
initial attack of the disease usually occurs in childhood and may affect many parts
of the body, especially the heart. If rheumatic heart disease develops, it sometimes
injures the heart muscle and its valves. So, the heart can not pump adequate blood
and the flow of blood within the body decreases.

Sometimes it is difficult for a doctor to diagnose rheumatic fever. If not diagnosed
or treated properly, weight loss, anemia, exhaustion, loss of appetite, pallor ete.
indicate the severity of the disease. Later red, swollen and painful joints are seen.
Tf the disease is detected or identified at an early stage, penicillin may be used to
cure it. Many physicians recommend penicillin be given regularly to children who
have rheumatic fever until they reach adulthood.

Measures to keep the heart sound: The heart starts functioning even before a
baby is born and continues till the last breath. The heart plays an important role
both in life and death. In order to keep the heart healthy, it is necessary to
maintain a proper life style and select the right kind of food. Oily or high-fat
foods obstruct the proper functioning of heart. Cholesterol in the blood harms
the heart by blocking blood vessels.

Drug and alcohol addiction increases heart beat and heart functioning. So, the
addicted person gets mental pleasure and peace for a while, but it causes serious
long-term harm to the heart. Poisoning due to smoking and taking nicotine of
tobacco (Jordha) damages the heart. Avoiding a fatty diet, such as- oils, fats,
excess carbohydrate and taking balance food, regular exercise and walking can
make a person healthy.

(Exercise

1. What is meant by transpiration?

2, What is diffusion?

3. How many kinds of blood cells are there and what are they ?
4. What are the funetions of an artery?

5. What is meant by blood pressure?

2025
2025

|, Describe the measures of keeping the heart sound.
2, Describe the process of absorbing water with a diagram.

|. What is the name of the membrane covering the heart?
a) Epicardium b) Miocardium
c) Pericardium d) Endocardium

2. Arafat saw some swelled raisins in a food (payesh) made of rice, milk and sugar.
In this case, what is the cause of the swelling of these raisins?
a. diffusion b. absorption
c, osmosis d. imbibition
Obserye the table and answer questions 3 and 4.

A.
Tamim B
Tasmia AB
Ratul oO

3. Ifblood input is necessary for Rafin. from whom he can receive blood?

a) Tamim b) Tasmia

c) Ratul d) Tamim and Ratul
4. Tasmia—

i) carries A, B antigen in blood

ti) can donate blood to Rafin

iii) can receive blood from Tamim.
Which one is correct?

ai &ii b) i & iii

¢) ii & iii d) i, it & iii
@) [Greative questions

a. What is adhesion?

b. What do you mean by imbibition?
Explain what the effects will be on the process for the absence of the constituent §
shown in the above figure.

d. Analyze the problems that may develop in the plant ifthe element X does not
reach the region Y shown in the picture.

2. Mr. Hasan is 50 years old. He serves in a socio-economic institution. He is
feeling headache, palpitation, restless. His 7 year old daughter Moon feels
joint pain, and her skin turned swollen and reddish, They consulted a doctor.
After some tests the doctor advised necessary measures.

a) What is blood?

b) Explain how white blood cells protect body.
c) Explain the causes of Mr. Hasan’s disease.

d) Which disease is incurable from the problems mentioned in the stem? Explain.

2025
