The basic reason behind the emergence of business was the feeling of want of
human beings. To meet up this want, men engaged themselves for earning a
living through various economic activities. In fact, business evolved on the basis
of economic activities and transactions. From this chapter we will be able to
know the different aspects of business like its concept, origin, features, classifi-

CHAPTER ONE
Introduction to Business

cation and business environment.

By the end of this chapter we will be able to

*

Describe the concept of business, its origin and its stages of development.
Explain business scope and features.

Describe ditterent types of business,

Explain the importance of business.

Describe the concept and various categories of industry,

Explain concept of commerce and its classification.

Describe the concept of services and its various nature with examples.

Identify various elements of environment affecting business.

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Farma-!
2 Business Entrepreneurship

CONCEPTS OF BUSINESS

Mr. Asaduzzaman, a Business Studies teacher, came to his first class of Business
Entrepreneurship of students of class nine. All the studenis cordially greeied
him. After exchanging greetings, he asked an open question to all the students,
"Among all of you, who has come trom a business family?" One student replied
that his father has a business of nce trading. Another student replied that his
father has a Poultry Farm. One student said that his father owns a Pharmacy.
Another one said that her mother has a Beauty Parlor. The teacher listened to
every one carefully and said that Trading of Rice, Raising Poultry, Selling
Medicine and operating Beauty Parlor; each of these represents an economic
activities, All the economic activities of your guardians will be included in
business if itis done for the purpose of earning a living and with the intention of
making a profit.

Generally, economic activities with a view to making a profit are termed as
business. Producing food, rearing poultry, cultivating vegetables etc. for the
family members are not business. But, when a farmer cultivates paddy or grows
vegetables to make a profit, it will be treated as business. But all the economic
activities operated to make profit will be treated as business if it is done legally
and in right ways.

Business has some other features which separate it from other professions.
Goods or services related to business must have monetary value. Risk factors are
another feature of business. Mainly, a business person makes investment to earn
profit. However, he must have the feeling for services along with generating
profit. Another significant feature of business is its sense of morality and social
responsibility.

Activity-1: Make a list of all the business operating around your House/School.
‘ oe
.
e
e
°
LJ
Identify the Features of Business

20235
2025

Introduction to Business 3

Origin and Evolution of Business

Over time, the scope of economic activities increase on the basis of human
demand. As a result activities like hunting, producing crops and exchanging
goods (barter system) started. But, exchanging goods or products could not meet
up all the needs. Because of this, in place of barter system uses of coins of
Gold/Silver (bullions), and later paper note was introduced as a medium of
exchange. The evolution of business can be classified as Primitive age, Middle
age and Modern age.

Steps of Business Evolution

Primitive Age Middle Age | Modern Age
« Hunting e Using scarce snail,/e Industrial revolution
« Fishing shell, Kori and stones) * Development of Information
* Collecting as medium of and communication technology.
fruits exchange « Spread of different industries
* Cultivations |* Using coins of metal * Introduction of large scale
farming like gold, silver ete. production and distribution
e Bartering « Introduction of paper Pieces
notes e Expansion of the business of
* Formation of market Banking and Insurance
and towns * Introduction of ATM card
¢ —Esiablishment of business, ¢ Introduction of Mobile banking
organization

Scope and Classification of Business

Today's business is not limited to buying and selling goods only. Business is the
combination of production of goods and services, exchanging of goods and
other activities associated with it. Transportation, Insurance, Banking,
Warehousing/Storing and Adve tisement play significant role in exchanging
products and goods. Modern business can be classified in the following three
types:

* Industry

e Commerce
e Direct Services
4 Business Entrepreneurship

Business

Industry Commerce | Direct Service

* Breeding Industry * Exchange of goods (buying and selling} « Lawyer
= Extractive industry * Transportation a Boetor
= Construction imedustey * Warehousing « Engineer
@ Service oriented Industry = Banking . Audit Fann
* Manufacturing Industry « Insurmce
* Advertisement

Industry

Industry is considered as the carrier of production. Industry is the process in
which natural resources are collected and turned into raw material. Afier that,
finished goods are prepared by processing that raw material for human use.
Industry is mainly divided into five categories:

e Genetic Industry: Products produced in this industry are used for
further production. Example nursery

« Extractive Industry: Through this industry natural resources are
collected from the enviorment such as earth, air and water. For
example - mining.

e Construction Industry: Through this industry roads and highways,
bridge, culvert ete are constructed

e Manufacturing Industry: In this type of Industry labour and machine
are used to process raw material to make finished goods. Such as
textile mills,

e Service Industry: This industry includes those economic activities
which make life of individual's easy and comfortable, For example.
production and distribution of Electricity, Gas, Banking and Health
Services etc.

£023
2025

Introduction to Business 5

Activity — 02 : Four examples of each Industry

Manufacturing Service

Genetic Extractive Construction

Industry Industry —s Industry =—|—s Industry =—s Industry |
*« Nursery © Mining | * Construction | ¢ Garments « Electricity
° * of Roads & Industry «
e * Highways . Py
s . s * e
. . * . e

s

Commerce

Commerce is the branch of business that distributes products and services.
Commerce includes all the activities from delivering raw materials to the
producer for the purpose of manufacturing or delivering goods and services to
the consumer. While buying and selling various problems regarding finance,
risk, place, time and information may arise. To remove these obstacles, the help
of various departments of Commerce such as Transportation, Storage, Banking.
Tnsurance, Distribution and Advertisement are needed. In modernage commerce
is termed as Business to Business.

Roles of various elements of commerce is depicted in the following chart —

Various Constraints in Elements of Role
Business Business |
Possession Exchange of goods | Removes the constraints of
|_and services ownership |
Placement Transportation Removes the constraints
| related to place
Timing Storing Removes the constraints
related to time
Finance Banking Removes the constraints
- | related to money _
Risk factors Insurance Removes the risk factors
Information Advertisement Removes the obstacles related
to information and circulation.

6 Business Entrepreneurship

Direct Services

Various self employed professionals like doctor, lawyer, architect provide their
specialized services in exchange of money as a mode of earnings. These sorts of
activities are called direct services or profession, Such as chamber of a doctor,
lawyer's chamber, Architect farm, Audil farm etc. Direct Services is a significant
part of modern business.

Importance of Business

Though business is considered as economic activities, it contributes to the
overall development of the socio-economic and political condition of a country.
From small shops to large industries all have been set up with assessing the
necessities of business. In the modern world the importance of business is
infinite. The countries that are at the peak of development are developed in the
sectors of business as well. Through business, proper utilization of resources 1s
possible and it quickens the development of the economic condition of a
country. Business contributes in savings. Thus formation of capital happens and
national income increases. Business helps to create employment for the
unemployed. Business develops the research and creative activities. Business
helps to exchange cultural views in addition to exchange of goods and services.
New cities and ports emerge for the sake of Business.

After passing SSC, Halima started a business with a small capital. Day by day
her business grew a successful business in the area. At present, nearly 50
men and women work in her organization. Most of the workers are the
homeless from river erosion. At the very beginning, [alima arranges to train
them simply. They make clothes of artistic design, design saree, three piece,
Panjabee, fatua etc with needle and yarn and sale them. Halima decided to
enlarge her business. But, she moved to village rather than city. She wishes to
utilize the village women. Day by day, most of the women of her village got
involved in her business. As a result, their economic condition started
changing in addition to their changes of standard of living.

Activity-3: Write down your concept of importance of Business
after reading the story of Halima’s Business.

| Importance of Business |

2025
2025

Introduction to Business 7

Business Environment:

Environment influences our life style, behavior, learning, culture, economy and
business. Environment is the combination of all the elements influencing the
lifestyle and economic activities of the people of a particular region. The
elements include - Geography, Climate, Rivers, Mountains, Forests, Nationality,
Religion, Education etc. Business environment thus can be defined as the
combination of all the natural and artificial elements; directly or indirectly
influencing the formation of business organization, its activities and
development or deterioration. The development of Business condition of a
certain place depends on the environment of business.

Chattogram port

Though there are various types of business environment, they are classified as
the following six main categories:

* Natural Environment

e Economic Environment
*® Political Environment
e Social Environment

e Legal Environment

® Technical Environment
8 Business Entrepreneurship

BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT

ee ee ee ee

ic
Natural Economic Social Political Legal
Environment Environment Environment Environment Environment

Technological
Environment

1. Chmate I. Savings & L.Nation |. Government L. Commercial |} |. lechnelogy
2. Lindsgape Investrnent 2, Religious 2. Sovereignty Law Learning
3.Natural 2. Capital Belief 4. Law and |] 2. Industrial 3 Technical
TesQurees Mlomey dk 3, Consumers Discipline Law Efficieney
4. Rivers Banking Perception 4. Political 3. Environment 4Te hn Based
4, Human Stability Protection Law feséugion Fe
Resources §. Government 4. Consumer
§, Education Policy Interest and |] + Opportunity of
& Culture 6. International | | Protection Law |} lnpecting
6. history Relation Technology
9 Tnformatign and Qam-
mutating Techoplogy

Business Environment in Bangladesh

Bangladesh is an agro based developing country. But the contribution of
Business to economy specifically industry and commerce has been increasing
every year. Once upon a time, this area was famous worldwide for trade and
conmmerce. Reputation of Sonargaon for making 'Moslin cloth' and Chattogram
for ship building, spread all over the world. Moslin clothes made in Sonargaon
and its adjacent areas used to be exported to countries in Europe and Affica. Our
country has always been well known for its trade and commerce. Long ago,
allured by the reputation of business of this region, the Arabs came here and
established business relationship with our ancestors. Business in this aréa was so
developed that it used to direly compete with the historically famous Tamrolipto
and Shaptagram. The fame of Business of this region spread around Europe and
beyond the countries of East. The Portuguese arrived here in 1600 AD and
started business. They used to call Shaptagram as ‘Porto Piqueno' or small port
and Chattogram as'Porto Grando' or big port. It is mentionable that Shaptagram
of West Bengal was also famous as a commercial port. Business with
Shaptagram used to be maintained through Bhagvirathi river and Sharswati canal
with Bay of Bengal. Our country was also famous for conducting Business
through sea. Sea going ships were also built in this country. As per statement
made by Chinese tourist Mr. Mahuyan, Roman Emperor did not like the Dock
and Ship of Alexandria and had selected to make his ships from Chatiogram
perceiving its superiority of construction technique. There were a number of

ei)

oxy
=
ey
Introduction to Business 8

ship building dockyards of efficient local architect at Halishahar and Patenga of
Chattogram, The dockyards of that place then, buzzed with the sound of hammer,
The ‘businessman’ of this country owned hundreds of ship. Famous historian
WW Hunter stated that those ship building dockyards maintained their reputation
till 1875. ; i

Sonargaon: The ancient capital of Bengal and
famous center for trade and commerce

In this competitive world, it is difficult to sustain in business if the
environmental elements are not supportive. The environmental elements of
business are discussed below in context to Bangladesh:

Natural Element: Most of the elements of natural environment m Bangladesh
are supportive for business. There are river in most of places in the country. As a
result, raw materials for various agro based industry and consumer products can
easily be grown. We have natural gas for business and industry. Existing Coal,
Lime Stone, Hard Rock, and Crude Oil is helpful for establishing industry.
Though our forest is decreasing, we are still rich in forest resources. Since we
have numerous rivers and bounded by sea, suitable environment for
development of fisheries industry also prevails here.

Economic Element: Prevailing effective money and banking system,
contribution of agriculture and industry, savings and investment mentality of
people and government assistance, work as a strong element for economic
environment. In Bangladesh, some of the economic elements have strong base
but most of them are very weak. Lack of sufficient capital, insufficient
availability of banking facility for village people comparing to those of city
dwellers, administrative complexity, harassment of middlemen and upward
inflation are prevalent. If all these constraints are removed, Bangladesh can
advance more rapidly for development in business.

Social Element: Nationality, religious belief, consumers perception, human
resources. education and culture, science and technology most of these social

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-2
10 Business Entrepreneurship

elements in Bangladesh are positive for expansion of business. From national,
historical and cultural context people of this country are liberal, industrious and
creative. In the past, people of this country marked their brilliance and industry
by making Moslin cloth and building ship. Once Sonargaon was best in the
world for trade, education, agriculture, literature, culture, industry and
handicrafts. At present. Jamdani Saree making and ship building have been able
to catch the eye of world. The future generation shall be able to show their
brilliance in industry, commerce, trade research etc. if it is possible to break the
system of memorization and make them competent and efficient by coming out
from the present education system. Besides, use of technology should be
emphasized in all sectors of trade and commerce.

Political Elements: Sound law and order situation and favourable industry
and trade policy, good relationship with neighboring countries and others help to
expand business. On the other hand, political instability, frequent government
changes, Hartal, strike and lack of business friendly industry and trade policy
etc. are negative elements of political environment which hinder the
development of industry and trade. Foreign investors also become disinterested
to Invest in such environment. The above mentioned elements of political
environment in Bangladesh are not in a position of optimum level. By removing
all the negative elements. such as labor unrest, strike and hartal etc. the political
elements for business can be improved in Bangladesh.

Legal Elements: Though some of the elements of legal environment in
Bangladesh are modern and up to date, most of them are primitive and old. The
business development of our country can be improved by designing and strongly
implementing law relating to preservation of environment and consumer law.
Preparing industry and investment friendly law and through strong
implementation of laws for anti Corruption, anti Nepotism, anti tolling preparing
law friendly to industry and investment, can also be ensure to develop our
business and trade.

Technological Environment: lor the development of business and trade, it is
necessary to have efficient labor, high tech machineries and technology. It is
evident that the countries that are highly developed in science and technology
are also developed in business. Technological development makes the
production process easier. As a result, both quantity and quality of production
also increase. In Bangladesh, most of the elements of technological
environment are positive. Use of technology is increasing gradualy in all sectors

of Business.

20235
2025

Introduction to Business il

Activity — 4: Give opinion about which of the environmental elements
in your area are positive/negative for business

Climate/Weather

Electricity

Land

Gas

Rivers

Religious belief

Consumers perception

Communication system

Education and culture

Tradition

Banking facilities

Law and orders

In conclusion, we can say that it is necessary to develop the environmental
elements influential for business and industry. We all have to come forward
along with government to make a supportive and positive environment for

industry and trade.
EXERCISE

Multiple Choice Question

1. Uses of scarce snail and shell as a medium of exchange is the attribute of
which era?

a. Primitive b. Middle age

c. Moghul Era d, Modern era.
2, Which port used to be called “Porto Granda’?

a, Chaltogram b. Khulna

c. Kolkata d. Shaptagram

3. Commerce helps to reach goods to the consumers through —
i, removing constraints of placement
ii. providing social assistance

iii. removing constraints of monetary problem
12 Business Entrepreneurship

which of the following is correct
a. i & ii b. i& iii
c. ii & tii d. i, ii & iii
Answer the question No. 4 & 5 after reading the following stem:

Shakila has a family nursery. They grow and sell various plants of flower and
fruits. Soil of their house is suitable for growing and nurturing plants. Since
the nursery iS situated near a pond, water is also available. As a result, the
quality of the plants from this nursery is very good.

4. The nursery of Shakila is what kind of industry?
a. Manufacturing b, Genetic
c. Service d. Construction

5, What is the main reason for better quality of the plants from Shakila’s nursery?
a. Natural b. Social

c. Economic d, Cultural

Creative Question
1. Nafis, a student of class ten of Akhitara village. His father is a tramed village
doctor. Besides treatment, he also sells medicine of good quality. Though there
is huge demand for various medicines in the village, he can not sell all kinds of
medicine because of some limitations. Medical representatives can not supply
the necessary medicines in time because of the lack of proper communication
system. On the other hand, many medicines get damaged since there is no
preservation system in the shop.

a. What is the main objective of the business?

b, What do you understand by industry? Give example.

c. What kind of business Nafis’ father has? Explain

d. What is the main reason you think of Nafis’ father’s inability to

supply medicine as per demand of the people of that area. Give

reason for your answer,

£023
2025

Introduction to Business 13

2. Once, Bangladesh was famous all over the world for Business. Such a cloth in
this country used to be made which had reputation among countries. The
environment and humidity of Meghna and Shitalakhya river were suitable for
making the yarn for this cloth. This was accompanied by the workers’ cordial
effort and creativity. If all the sectors associated with business environment can
be developed, trade and commerce will develop as well and the lost glory of
business will return,

a. For which cloth the fame of Bangladesh had spread around the world?
b. What do you understand by business environment? Explain

c. By developing which environment creativity of the above mentioned
workers and labors is possible? Explain.
d. What clements of business environment you think are necessary to be

developed for the development of Trade and Commerce in the country.
Give reason for your answer.
