2025

Chapter Thirteen

Development Activities and Environment
in Bangladesh

The elements of the environment depend on one another Plants, imsects, animals, man
live in a harmony in the environment. The dependency is interrupted if the
harmony of the environment is altered. Development is very Important for any
country, Development depends on the economic activities. The economic activities
of our country is still dependent on the natural resources. So, the sustainability and
development will have to be ensured through the environmental balance. A
coordimated effort must be imitiated for a lastmg environmental development.

Some development activities

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-

explain the balance and imbalance of the environment;

* explain the development activities along with the explanations of some
mentionable development activities of Bangladesh;

* explain how the environment was polluted and imbalance was created at the
time of implementation of the development activities:

* analyze the result of environmental imbalance;

* analyze how the environmental balance influencs the development activities:
206 Geography and Environment

« find out the measures of protecting the environmental balance of
during implementation of the development activities;

* make ourselves aware of the results of the environmental imbalance and
make others aware of these.

Development activities and environmental balance
Development is very important for a country. Every man and the country want
development to raise the standard of living. So some internal developments have
to be done for this. These types of development should be conducted in coordination
with the environment. So, the development activities should be conducted in such
away that it does not harm the environmental balance.

lf the road from your house to the school is unpaved or broken, you will see that
sometime later it is repaired so that people can move easily. And if you pay your
attention a little bit to your surroundings, you will notice that the houses made with
in or wood are beimg replaced by buildings. When the skill is increased with the
demand it is known as development. If we consider it in a larger perspective, we
can observe the development ofa country like the diagram below :

Development
l
Agriculture Industrial Communication Housing
Sector Sector Sector Sector

Bridges, dams, culvert, industries, roads, railways are to be built in such a
way that cannot alfect the natural elements of environment. Bangladesh slopes
gradually from north to south. For increasing the road connection form west to east,
it is essential to build sufficient numbers of bridges with proper draimage system to
avoid flooding. Industrial polutants have polluted different rivers. Industries
and housing have been established on the fill up rivers. So, development should be
initiated in such a way that it does not affect environment and resources . So the

development works should be designed in such that they do not affect environment
and resources.

If a development work around a pond is conducted by cutting the trees around it, it
will result m the destruction of small plants, msects and fish. Gradually the pond
will be filled up with silt and long term resource gathering will come to an end. At
last. the pond will lose its existance.

2025
2025

Development Activities of Bangladesh and Environmental Balance 207

Some development activities of Bangladesh

We have known from the previous discussion that increasing the ability according
to the demand of man is called development. Darkness is removed by lighting a oil
lamp directly. Oil, gas or coal are used to produce the electricity. The electric lights
have more power than oil lamp. This change is called development. Various
developmental sectors are discussed where Bangladesh is doing good,

Development in agriculture sector

The economic development mostly depends on the development of agriculture. To
ensure the food security, the development of agriculture sector is required. The amount of
chemical fertilizer used in agriculture is increasing gradually over the vears for the
increasing production of food due to the growing demand from the population. The
same land is cultivated round the year. What we do for the development of
agriculture is given below.

| To increase agriculture production

| T
: Tam ( |
Use of underground] |Use of pesticides|] Same land is || Use of fertilizer
water for irrigation / | cultivated many times

Development in industrial sector

Rapid industrialization is necessary for the progress of social development. The
role of industries in the economic development of Bangladesh is very important. The
industry sector can be developed in many ways which are mentioned below.

Industries based on

[Production industry exploration of mineral
resources and processing

Industries based on Industrial ‘Tourism and service
information and technologies [*—— Development = industry
4 Se industry |
Agricultural and forest The energy industry for ensuring
industries of energy security

208 Geography and Environment

Development in transport and communication sector

The transport and communication accelerates the development of agriculture and
industry. The development of a country depend on transport and communication
sector. Well-organized infrastructure and modem transport system are essential
for development. The socio-economic development of a country depends on the
massive transport development. Information and communication teachnology has
spread over rural areas of Bangladesh. Technology related to internet, mobile phone,
television. radio have extended rapidly.

Consiruction of highways, bridges, flyovers and ferry terminals have a profound
influence on the development of transport sector.

Development in housing sector

Development in housing sector depends on
the development of other sectors of the country,
It is an inirastructural development (fig. 13.1).
Housing sector development indicates a
coordinated development in safe water supply
of drinking water, healthy sanitation system and

drainage for sewerage disposal.

Fig. 13,1 : Infrastructural development

The housing development means supply of drinking pure water, healthy sanitation
system and sewerage disposal infrastructure.

Development activities in Bangladesh and environment pollution

Development is expected by all the countries. The sustainable and environment
friendly development brings well-being for the country. We pollute the environment
for the lack of knowledge or education, information about environment and for
making profit.The main elements of environment are land, water, wind and forest
resources. The way the elements of environment are polluted for development has
been discussed before. It can be understood easily by a schematic diagram.

2025
Development Activities of Bangladesh and Environmental Balance 209

Result : Insects and micro organism in the soil are affected. The habitat for the
small wild animals are destroyed. The plants cannot grow in the polluted soil. As a
result, soil turns into desert,

Result: The small aquatic plant named plankton, water hyacinth and moss cannot
grow. The small fishes which eat these aquatic vegetation suffer from food
shortage and this big fishes are in trouble too.

Forma-27, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
210 Geography and Environment

Indusirial waste |

Smoke from transport |
{Smoke from house-hold _|

Smoke from construction materials
and brick helds

Wind

Result : These unexpected work increase the amount of carbon dioxide (CO) and
Chlorofluoro carbon (CFC) gas in the air. As a result, it causes greenhouse effect.
It raises the normal temperature. It causes less rainfall indirectly, Soil absorbs more

temperature, As a result. many areas have been treeless or plantless,

Forest resources

The forest resource is a great factor which maintains the environmental balance of a
country. The total areas of our forest land is around 17 percent. We use wood as fuel
and for making furniture. building constructing and industry, The environment is
being spoiled as a result of this. The forests are being deforested and the soil ts
getting exposed. So the soil is eroded rapidly and thus the fertility ts decreasing.

Result of Environmental Imbalance

The over use of cach of these three resources- water, forest, land- affect the
balance and environment affected due to the over use of resources. Many aquatic
animals and fishes have been extinct by polluted a aquatic system. Many types of
forests are extinct now and others are in the process of extinction. Many wild
animals have also disappeared,

The habitat of foxes, hares and wild cats were destroyed for deforestation which has
broken down the food chain. This has negative impact on land ecosystem as well as
on society. Over use of natural resources is causing imbalance in the nature.
As a result, temperature has increased in summer
and has decreased in winter in the northern areas
of Bangladesh. Besides frequency of cyclone
and tidal waves have increased. Major parts
of Shatkhira, Barishal, Narail and Noakhali
districts will gounder water due to green house

~~ effect. Besides, saline water is having access in
es ct See yy 5 I wath .

Fig. 13.2 : Increase of salinity in coastal region d. This will hinder the natural growth of
plants (fig. 13.2). Landslide is increasing. Resulting in water logging. Indirectly, many

2025
2025

Development Activities of Bangladesh and Environmental Balance 211

diseases are increasing such as asthma, skin disease and stomach problem and
other infectious diseases. The total environment will be imbalanced if this continues
resulting in disaster. So, a tolerable and sustainable environment is desirable.
We can save the environmental balance through proper management and awareness.

Techniques of keeping the balance of environment

We use the natural resources from the environment. The environment will exist if the
natural resources are used properly. So, we have to be responsible to maintain the
environmental balance by conservation.

ee change the location but

zs
change the river course nN /
= Canservation of Environment |
| Stop hill cutting
, | Ns Excavateing

To free the river banks from
encroachment

the tiver bed if filled with
alluvium

Use cautiously not to pollute wind, water
and soil

The environment is damaged everyday. Who will save it? It is our duty to save. We
should be careful about the environmental element, use it with great care and
compensate the environmental damage. Thus the environment will be preserved.

The forest resources also play a great role in the national economy of the
environmental balance is maintained. A negative impact is being created due to
increasing population, felling the trees for fuel from the forest and deforestation
for agricultural purpose are causing negative impact on the environment. The
environment may be preserved if soil pollution, air pollution and water pollution
are controlled.

Massive afforestation and forest conservation in the
country will cause the scarcity of forest resources.
To ensure the supply of raw materials to wood based \ Forest development
mills and factories and ensure biodiversity and and conservation

preserve the wild life is the responsibility of the
Forest Department for development and conservation.

212 Geography and Environment

The measures which should be taken for conservation of the forest are given below :

1. Extend forest areas by afforestation on the deforested hills and on khas lands.

2. In rural areas plant trees in marginal and an uncultivated pices of land.

3. Afforestation should be done on all the embankments especially of roads and
railways.

4, To increase the public awareness for conservation of forest and forest resources.

5. To implement the special projects in preserving the biodiversity.

We have to strengthen our fuel security, We have to invent new techniques for
energy production using renewable sources as solar, wind, bio-gas, sea, animal. and

human energy. To preserve and control the environmental pollution the following
steps should be taken:

To build up suitable effluent treatment plant for the industries.
To implement the conservation of biodiversity.

1. Control the production and use of polyethylene bags.
2.
3.
4. To build up the social forestation.

4

To control air pollution.

es |

Save the river movement.
To control the use of wood at brick kiln.

ee

All out effect has been taken to observe.

Bangladesh is a member of United Nation| The different international days about
environment activities (Unicef) and a member| environmental issues declared by UN
country of South Asian Cooperation on} such as world environment days, world
Environmental Organization Programme | desertification day, international ozone day,
(Sacep). world climate day will create public awareness,

To ensure sustainable development and to decrease environmental degradation. a
coordinated policy, development of organizational structure, introduction of sustainable
method to implement the environmental agenda are necessary.

Biodiversity

Normal condition of various types of plant and animal living together in the
same environment is called biodiversity and this, ensures the environmental balance.
2025

Development Activities of Bangladesh and Environmental Balance 313

Conservation of biodiversity
Biodiversity is the main factor to maintain environment and environmental balance.
Natural resources are the source of producing the necessary goods and service for

man. Man is dependent on nature for food, clothing. housing. medicine, recreation
etc. These natural resources are available from forests, rivers, wetlands and oceans.

Due to the short sightedness of man, human activity is gradually decreasing the
biodiversity. If this condition continues, by 2025 about 20-25 percent living things and
plants will be extmet.

Bangladesh has a vast biodiversity and has great prospects. But those are now at a
threat. The habitat for animals are bemg decreased due to increasing number of
population. They have lost their hunting ground. Once upon a time the Royal
Bengal Tigers were found in many areas of Bangladesh. Now it is found only in
the Sundarban. At the very beginning of nineteenth century, elephants were found
in the forests of Bhawal and Madhupur Garth. Nowadays it is only found in
the hilly areas of Chattogram Hill Tracts. Sylhet and Mymensingh.

In Bangladesh 119 types of mammals, 578 types of birds, 124 types of reptiles and
19 types of amphibians have been identified.“Red Data Book’ published by
the International Union for Conservation of nature has identified 23 species of
animal of Bangladesh as endangered species. In this list there are Royal Bengal
Tiger, Cheetah. Elephant. Python, Crocodile and Estuarine Crocodile. According
to some other estimation 27 wild animals are endangered and 39 more are at risk.
In the 19th century 19 species became extinct. Among these are 3 types of cows, wild
buffalo, a type of black swan, various types of deer, sweet water crocodile etc.

For conservation of biodiversity strong, immediate and active steps must be
taken. Cooperation and assistance among the different international
organizations, regional organizations, NGOs, private sectors and mionitory

institutions, along with United Nation should be strengthen and the activities given
below are to be initiated.

* To survey at the national level to assess the present condition of biodiversity of

Bangladesh.
214

Geography and Environment
For conservation of biodiversity and sustainable use of national policy should

be made which will be in coordination with the national development policy.

Encourage the participation of people in order to use the biodiversity, conservation, and
growth.

To preserve the natural habitat through identification and introduce restricted

areas. The Forest Directorate of Bangladesh has taken some activities.

Projeets taken in order to develop the production and maintain the ecosystem
by restricting forest areas of Sundarban.

To stop the illegal wild life trade within the mternal boundary of the country and
to take the project in order to preserve, develop and manage the diversity of
different restricted areas.

Very recently as a part of preservation of diversity and natural environment
Sonachor wild life sanctuary, Chandpai wild life sanctuary, Dudu Mukhi wild life
sanctuary and Tangmari wild life sanctuary have been made.

Exercise

Multiple choice questions

1.

Which districis of Bangladesh will be under water for the Greenhouse effect?
a. Noakhali b. Dinajpur

¢. Rangpur ad. Bogura

To reduce the degradation of environment—
i. coordinated policy.
ii, improvement of organizational structure.

iii, Invention and implementation of environment friendly sustainable techniques
Which one of the following is correct?
a Land ii b. iand iii

c. tiand iii d. i, ii and iii

2025
2025

Development Activities of Bangladesh and Environmental Balance 215

Read the text below and answer the questions 3 and 4:

Sumi went to the house of maternal uncle at Khulna during winter vacation. One day she
going to Sundarban with her maternal uncle and saw many kinds of animals and trees.

She heard from her uncle that many more wild animals and trees were there in the past.
3. What was found in the forest visited by Sumi?

a. Koroil, Gajari b. Garan, Golpata
c. Chapalish, Telsur d. Sal, Segun
4. Ifthe above mentioned forest is destroyed —
i. it will increase the salinity of underground water.
ti. the environment of growing plant will be destroyed.
iii, the amount of destruction will be reduced by tidal-water.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. land ii b. iand ii
ec. tiand iii d. i, iiand ii
Creative questions

1. A group of students went to the Shityalakha River for a journey by boat. They got
surprised to see the unnatural colour of water of the river.

a. What is the name of aquatic and small creatures?
b. How is soil polluted? Explain,
Why is the colour of water not natural observed by the students? Explain.
d. What steps should be taken to get back the natural colour of that river?
2. Kanok and Kakon on their way to Savar felt a burning sensation in their eyes after
crossing Amin Bazar. They saw many brick fields on both sides of the road.
a. What is air pollution?
b. What is imbalance of environment? Explain.
c. Explain the burning sensation of eyes of Kanok and Kakon.
d

Explain how does the environment mentioned in stem affect the trees’?
