Chapter nine

Refraction of light

The velocity of light in a vacuum is 2.99792458 x10°ms". If light enters a
medium, its velocity decreases from this. To explain this process a quantity named
refractive index is defined. You can easily show that light changes its direction due to
the change of its velocity while passing from one medium to another. Due to this
property of light, or refraction, a wonderful event may happen named total
internal reflection. We will discuss various uses of total internal reflection in this
chapter.

Convex and Concave lens can be made by using refraction. Which type of
images can be formed using these two lens will be discussed in this chapter.

2025
2025

Refraction of light

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

explain the laws of refraction.

explain the refractive index.

explain total internal reflection.

explain the use of optical fibers.

describe lenses and their classification.

describe different qualities of lense by drawing a ray diagram.

describe the image formed by lenses by drawing a ray diagram.

describe the power of lenses.

243
244 Physics

9.1 Refraction of light

You know that when light moves from one medium to another, three different
events may happen . One is reflection, where some amount of light come back
to the first medium while entering the second medium and we have discussed
this in the previous chapter. Another one is refraction, when light passes from the
first medium to the second. We will discuss this in this chapter. Another one is
absorption, when some amount of light is absorbed, which we will not discuss
here.

In order to understand refraction a quantity named the refractive index (n) is
used. We know the velocity of light in a vacuum is 2.99x108 ms"! and when it
passes through a medium this velocity decreases. In a medium, the factor by
which the velocity of light reduces is the refraction of light of that medium .
For instance the velocity of light in water is 2.26x108 ms” therefore the
refractive index of water is

c 299x108 ms? _
vy 2.26X108 ms?
i.e. the velocity of light in a vacuum is 1.33 times greater than the velocity of
light in water .

n= 1.33

Table 9.01: Refractive index

The refractive index of the glass fiber in a
of some substance

fiber optic cable is 1.5.

Therefore, the velocity of light in the fiber is Vacuum 1,00
Ai
v =3X108 ms1/1.50 = 2.00 x 108 ms? i 1,00029
i, . . Water 1.33
Refractive index is a number and it has no Normal glass| 1.52
unit. As the maximum velocity of light is c, ;
Diamond 2.42

the value of always greater than 1 . In
Table 9.01 the refractive index of some substances are given.

Naturally, the refractive index of a vacuum will be 1.

The refractive index of air is 1.00029 which is so close to 1that we will take it as
1 during calculations.

Example

Question : Calculate the velocity of light in the mediums shown in Table 9.01 .

Auswer : Velocity of light in any medium: v = <

2025
Refraction of light 245

In vacuum v = 3 x 108 ms?/1.00 = 3x10® ms?
In air v = 3X 108 ms1/1.00029 = 3x10 ms?
Inwater v=3x108ms1/1.33 = 2.26 x 108 ms?

In normal glass v = 3 x 10° ms1/1.52 = 2x 108 ms?
In diamond v = 3 x 108 ms*/2.42 = 1.24 x 108 ms

To determine the refractive index of a
medium is, the wavelength of light
for which the refractive index is

measured must be stated, because the first medium

refractive index depends on the
wavelength of light.

9.1.1 Laws of refraction

What we need to understand the
laws of refraction are already known.
In the case of reflection of light we
have imagined a normal from the Figure 9.01 : Refraction of light from
point of incident. We do the same first medium to the second

here . In Figure 9.01 we will call the

angle between the incident ray and the normal as the angle of incidence and the
angle between the refracted ray and the normal as angle of refraction.

second medium

/ First Law of Refraction: The refracted ray will lie on the same plane as the
incident ray and the normal.

Second Law of Refraction: If the refractive index of the first medium is n,,
the refractive index of the second medium is n,, the angle of incidence is 0, ,
the angle of refraction is 9,, then

Se nisiné; = nz sin & y,

If you remember this, you will be able to solve all problems about
refraction of light.

2025
246 Physics
If the first medium is air then taking n,=1, (Figure 9.02)

we can write m= sind,
2=7
sin 6,

As the value of n, is greater than 1, 0, < 6, i.e after refraction, the ray of light
will bend towards the normal . We say the medium is denser if the value of n is
greater . We are not calling the medium denser due to its mass . Here the
meaning of a denser medium the that the value of n is more . Therefore,
according to the second law of refraction, when a ray of light enters from a rarer
medium to a denser medium, the refracted ray bends towards the normal. When
it enters from a denser medium to a rarer medium, it goes away from the normal
(Figure 9.02). Remember that refractive index of a medium has no direct relation

with density of that medium.

rarer medium rarer medium ! a,

my

1 na . denser medium /}
i \denser medium t

Figure 9.02 : The refracted ray bends towards the normal when entering
from a rarer medium to a denser medium, and it goes away from the
normal when entering from a denser medium to a rarer medium.

Here only the incident ray and refracted rays are drawn, as refraction of light is
discussed, but we must remember that when a ray of light goes from one
medium to another every time some amount of light is reflected. How much light
will be reflected and how much light will refracted depends on the angle of
incidence. When there is an increase in the angle of incidence, the reflection
increases.

2025
2025

Refraction of light 247

@) Do Yourself

(— >

=a)
No
i
—

Figure 9.03 : Refraction of light in water and glass

Put a coin in a cup and place the cup in front of you so that the coin is
not seen . How is it possible to see the coin without moving your head?
After pouring water in the cup, the coin will be seen. Due to refraction
light will bend and reach your eyes. It will also seem as if the coin has

moved upwards.
Ne y,

Example

Question: A ray of light is incident on a medium of n= 1.6 with an angle
of incidence 45 (Figure 9.04 a) . With what angle will it enter into the
second medium ?

Answer: We know 7, sin@, = nz sin &

ind, = “sing, =x == 0.44
Therefore sin @, = te sin; = 7% ie
0, = 26°

Question : In Figure 9.04 b, a ray is incident from air to another medium at an
angle of 60° and refracted at angle 8f 45 . What is the refractive index of the
second medium?
248 Physics

(b)

Figure 9.04: (a) Angle of incidence of light is 45° (b) Angle of
incidence is 60° and angle of refraction is 45°

Answer : We know n,sin@, = nz sin 0,

1x sin60°= n,sin45°

9.1.3 Relative refractive index

We said that the refractive index of a medium is always greater than 1. Because
, as the refractive index of a medium is a comparison of the velocity of light in
that medium with the velocity of light in a vacuum, it will be greater than 1.
Sometimes the refractive index of a medium is expressed in comparison with
another medium. Then the refractive index may be less than 1 depending on
which medium is being compared with which.

For example, if water is the first medium and glass is the second medium (Figure

9.05) then nz sin@, = nz sin A,

ny = 1.33
Nz = 1.52

The refractive index of glass compared to water:

vi W/m nz _ sinh

Vi

vw |, “ny, siné,

=1.14

which is greater than 1. Here, vy, means speed of light in vacuum.

2025
Refraction of light 249

The refractive index of water while compared to with glass

nm,  sin@

Mm sind = 0.88

which is less than 1.

You therefore divide the refractive
index of the medium that you want to
determine by the refractive index of
the medium with respect to which
you want to determine the refractive
index .

Diamond with respect to water : 1.82
Water with respect to diamond : 0.55
Diamond with respect to glass : 1.59
Glass with respect to diamond : 0.63

ny
water

glass nz

But in physics usually the refractive
index of a particular substance is
used, not the refeactive index of one Figure9.05: Refraction of light from
substance in comparison to another. water to glass

9.2 Total Internal Reflection

When discussing reflection, we learned that when perfect and total reflection
is needed, then instead of mirror a perfect transparent medium is
used, and a kind of reflection is made. This is called total internal
reflection. It is a very easy and exciting process. Here, light rays are sent
to a rarer medium from a denser medium using the refraction of light. We
know (and have used many times) that the law of refraction is
n, sin@, =n, sin8, ie if n, is greater than n, then 6, is greater than @,.

Suppose you are sending a ray of light from a denser(n, ) medium to a rarer(n,)
medium (Figure 9.06).According to the laws of reflection and refraction some
amount of light will be reflected and some will be refracted . As 6, will be greater
than 0, therefore staying 6,(90°,0, will be equal to 90° and after this there will

be no scope of light to be refracted, i.e when 6, will be equal to 90°, total
light has to be reflected . The value of 6, at which 8, = 90° is called the critical angle ,.

Forma-32, Physics, Class 9-10
250

Physics
n,sin90° =n, sing,
. n
sind, =—
n,
6 8
mh \ ny my
ca
Ty fiz Ts
Oy 6; 8: 0,
a a, LAN
8 <68e 6, =6e

6) > Oc

Figure 9.06: When passing from a denser medium to a rarer medium, total internal
reflection of light may occur .

ie n, sin90° = n, sin 6,

: ny
or sin 6, = —
Ng

If we know the values of n, and n, we could calculate an angle 9, for which
the above law is true. Therefore, the law can be expressed as

_1{™%
9; = sin™+ (=)
N2

nz for glass = 1.52 and
mn, for air = 1.00
m 1.00

me = 152 7 066

Figure 9.07 : Most teeming reflection
occurs in total internal reflection .

It is possible to show that, sin 41.8° = 0.66 or sin~1(0.66) = 41.8°,
therefore the critical angle 6, = 41.8°

2025
2025

Refraction of light 251

When sending light from transparent glass to air, if the ray of light is incident at
an angle greater than 41.8°, the ray of light will not emerge from transparent
glass and will be totally reflected . If you have a prism then you will be able to
see total internal reflection with your own eyes. In Figure 9.07, at the glass-air
separating surface the incident angle is 45° ,which is greater than the critical
angle 41.8° of glass-air. Therefore total internal reflection will occur here.

Example

Question : What will happen if you want to do this experiment under
water ? (n, for glass is 1.52 and n, for water is 1.33)

Answer: In water = 0.88 ,therefore the critical angle of glass will be 61.6°
because sin 61.6° =0.88

or sin'(0.88) = 61.6°

As the angle of incidence is 45° , which is less than the critical angle 61.6°, total
internal reflection will not occur.

Question : Light incidents at an angle of
75° from a medium of refractive index
1.45. With what angle will the ray of

light emerge if there is air on the other 7

side . = m= 1.45
Answer : We know NO n= 0
n, sinO; = nz sin 9, Os
1.45 x sin75° = 1x sin 6, |
sin @2 = 1.40 Figure 9.08 : Light incidents at angle 75°.

We know the value of sin 6, will not be greater than 1, but here it happens
because light is totally reflected without refracting . Therefore whenever we
want to see the refraction of light from a denser medium to a rarer medium then
it is better to determine the critical angle first. If light incidents at an angle less
than this critical angle, only then it is possible to get refraction.
252 Physics

In this case if the critical angle is 9,

1
sind, = 145 = 0.69

6, = 43.6°
Therefore, if light incidents at angle 75° , then total internal reflection will happen
instead of reflection.

9.2.1 Rainbow

You may be thinking that you have never seen total internal reflection. But those
who have seen a rainbow have seen total internal reflection . A rainbow is
formed by the total internal reflection of water. Those who have not separated
white light into different colors with prism , have seen this in a rainbow . If the
sun shines after rain, we see a rainbow. Because there are water droplets in the
air, in that water total internal reflection occurs, where different colors of light
bends in different angles . The bands of different color of the rainbow are formed
by these light rays . Those of you who have seen a rainbow have seen that the
rainbow always forms in the sky opposite to the sun. Surely now you have
understood the reason for this.

Figure 9.08 (a): Rainbow

9.2.2 Mirage

Mirage is a common phenomenon in the desert You will be surprised to hear
that a mirage also happens due to total internal reflection. The word comes from
changes of density of air due to heat in the desert. We know heated air, being
lighter, goes up, but due to the heated sands in the desert the nearby air may
hotter than the upper air. Thus, we can imagine the air in desert as in Figure 9.09.

2025
2025

Refraction of light 253

In order to illustrate this easily only three layers are shown. The density of the
air in upper level is high and so the refractive index is high. Air in the lower level
is heated, so density is low and its refractive index is also low. During refraction
of light from the tree, in each layer the angle of refraction will increase and at the
lowest level total internal reflection may happen. When entering a medium of
lower refractive index from a medium of higher refractive index there is a
possibility of crossing the critical angle because the angle of incidence is higher
if it is seen from far . So a mirage is seen from far and cannot be seen from near.
If a person looks at a tree from far away, he can see the tree directly, and due to
total internal reflection he can also see an image of that tree under the tree. It will
seem that the image of the tree is seen due to the existence of water under the
tree. After coming closer, it will be clear that there is no water.

Figure 9.09 : Mirage is seen due to the difference of density of the air in the desert.

While driving a car on a heated road in the summer, a wet road is seen far away
for the same reason. After coming closer it is seen that the road is dry. This is
also a kind of mirage.

9.3 Uses of refraction

There are different uses of refraction. The uses which play
important roles in our lives are:
254 Physics

9.3.1 Optical fiber

Electric wire is replaced by thin glass fiber for communication of the new world.

In the past, information was sent with
electric signals; now information is sent
with light signals. In a free state light
goes in straight line, but in an optical
fiber the light is trapped so it is possible
to turn it in any direction by rotating on

any side . Figure 9.10: Light can pass through
An optical fiber is a very thin fiber of optical fiber by total internal
glass. The inner part of it is called the reflection.

core and the outer part is called clad . Although the two are made of same glass,
the refractive index of the inner part (core) is greater than that of the outer part.
For this reason light can be taken very long distances by trapping it in optical
fibers the through total internal reflections (Figure 9.10). Light can be taken
hundreds of kilometers through optical fibers, because the absorption of light in
optical fibers is very low. Absorption would have been greater if the visible light
was there so infrared rays of long wavelength are used in optical fibers. How
optical fibers are used in a process called endoscopy of medical science is
described in the last chapter.

Example

Question: If the refractive index of the
core in an optical fiber is 1.50 and the T=
refractive index of the clad is 1.45, (Figure __ oF kd oo
9.11) what is the angle of incidence of |

light for total internal reflection to occur?

ny 1.45

. 4 (1
Answer : 6, = sin (2) Figure 9.11: Total internal reflection
occurs from core to clad in optical
Here fiber

m= 145 4 nz = 1.50

2025
2025

Refraction of light 255

45
6, = sin"? (=) = sin-1(0.97) = 75°

Therefore light has to incident at an angle of 75° or more.

9.3.2 Periscope and binocular

There is something called periscope

in submarines and it is possible to see

above the water surface while under & ~ NX
water by periscope. The periscope is |
made by a prism and its total internal

reflection is more effective than a periscope

made of ordinary mirrors (Figure

9.12). In order to reduce the length of

binoculars, total internal reflection is
done using prisms in it.

9.3.3 Prism

Interms of optics, if a transparent
medium is bound by another
two surfaces of a _ transparent
medium are not parallel, this is
called prism. The light goes out ina
direction parallel to the direction
in which it enters the transparent
medium. Though the direction

remains unchanged, the light ray bends a little bit from the main ray. In the case
of prism the direction of light changes (Figure 9.13). While entering the first
surface the ray bends toward the normal. The second surface is not parallel, so
when going out from this surface the light ray moves away from the normal but
cannot move towards the main ray. Though in a prism the direction of light
changes, it is important for another reason. After entering the prism, how much
the ray of light will deviates from the main direction depends on the refractive
index of the prism. We know that the refractive index depends on the wavelength
or the color of light. So there is a different refractive index for different colors.
Therefore, if there exists different colors in the same ray of light, when passing
through a prism the ray of light of each color will change its direction in different
angles. Therefore we will see that when coming out from the prism the light is
separated into its component colors. This was first shown by Newton.

Figure 9.12 : Prism is used instead
mirror in periscope
256 Physics

9.3.4 Lens

A lens is created using two spherical sides or a AN

spherical side and a plane Using lenses, starting Vs ‘original direction
from spectacles, sensitive optical instruments a. fe of light

like telescopes and microscopes are > cena o

made. A lenses are also used in video ot fe va
projectors and cameras. In this chapter, “ if emithed light
we'll broadly discuss about lenses, direction

fl d thei rties.
types of lenses and their properties Figure 9.13: In prism rays of light

deviate towards the base of the
prism.

9.4 Types of lenses

In convex and concave mirrors, we’ve seen that, when light enters these mirrors,
sometimes it focuse to a point (converging ray) or sometimes it diverges
(diverging ray) and the image is formed. That image is sometimes real and
sometimes virtual. Sometimes it is big, sometimes it is small. Using these images
in many ways, optical instruments have been
developed.

Many types of images are made by convex or
concave mirrors which also be made by
lenses and they are used in many ways. We
have all seen lenses (because the spectacles
are actually a kind of lens). Those of you who
have used spectacles or have seen others using
spectacles have certainly noticed that lens of
spectacles can be divided into two types.
Small things can be seen bigger with one
kind oflens (usually the lenses of spectacles
for old people are like this). Again big things
can be seen smaller with another kind of lens.
( Usually the lens of spectacles of the young people are like this). The lenses with
which small things are seen bigger are called convex or (sometimes) converging
lenses. The lenses with which big things are seen smaller are called concave or
(sometimes) diverging lens. Mid portion of the lenses with which small things
are seen bigger or convex lens is thicker than the edges. And the mid portion of

Figure 9.14: Cross section of
a convex and a concave lens

2025
Refraction of light 257

the concave lens is thinner than the edges as shown in 9.14. If we see the cross
section of the concave or convex lens we can understand that both are bound
with two round circles. The radius of these two circles can be different or the
same. The centers of these circles are called the centres of curvature. In the
picture 9.15, C, and C, are the centres of curvature.

Different kinds of lenses are used in everyday life or in different subjects of
science.

+ + + a
GQ C2 Ci C2

Figure 9.15: Convex and concave lens can be imagined as the part of two
circles.

We will keep our discussion limited to
thin lenses. Though the difference
between thin and thick lenses can be

understood by their names, let us va
explain this more. Looking at the cross . ~
. deviated ray —"
section of the lens, we can see that  gicction 1 oe
though the lens has a curvature in the ae a

surface, at the middle the two surfaces we,
are almost parallel. We know when light -
passes through a parallel surface it is ofiginal ray
deviated a little from the main direction
direction due to refraction (Figure
9.16).

As the parallel surface thickens, the
rays of light will deviate more. If the
parallel surfaces are close to each other
,we can say that main rays of light go

Figure 9.16: When passing through
thick glass light rays are deviated
from main rays due to refraction.

Forma-33, Physics, Class 9-10
258 Physics

out roughly in the same direction, there is no deviation .

In the case of those lenses in which light ray passing through it, the direction of
the ray remains unchanged is called a thin lens. (Figure 9.17). We can say that
the point of the middle of a thin lens through which light rays do not deviate
when passing through it is called the center of that lens (Figure 9.17, point O)
or the Optical center.

Figure 9.17: When passing through a thick lens rays of light deviate a little;
when passing through a thin lens light rays do not change direction.

9.4.1 Concave lens

While discussing about convex and
concave mirrors, we first learned
about convex mirrors. In the case of
lens at first we will discuss concave
lens. Because a concave lens forms the
image a like a convex mirror.

In the case of a convex mirror we saw |
that parallel rays diverts in all __| facal
directions during reflection. In the ' length
case of concave lens the same thing
occurs. The incident parallel rays on
this lens are diverted during refraction.

Figure 9.18: Rays of light diverges
when passing through a concave lens.
If we extend the refracted rays of light
backwards, it would seem that they
are spreading out directly from a point.

2025
2025

Refraction of light 259

That point is called the focal point and the distance from the focal point and the
center of lens is called the focal length. (Figure 9.18)

In case of a convex mirror, light is incident from one side. In the case of a
lens, light can be incident on it from both sides. Every lens has a focal length

.The focal length of a lens remains the same whichever direction the light is
incident on it. If parallel light
incidents on this lens, the rays spread
out, and appear to diverge from focal
point. If the direction of the rays of
light is reversed then they goes back
through the direction they came. So if
we can reverse the direction of
divergent rays, then they will emerge
in parallel and will go in the inverted
direction (Figure 9.19).

To understand how an image is
formed in concave lens, we need to
know how light rays are refracted
through a concave lens. It depends on
the angle with which the light ray is

falling. If we know the three special rules of refraction of light, we can explain
how the image is formed:

Figure 9.19: While passing through
concave lens rays of light converging
rays emerge in parallel.

(i) Ifthe ray of light is centripetal (Figure 9.20, YO or XO ray) it goes
straight after refraction.
(ii) The rays which are parallel with the principle axis, (Figure 9.20 XP) will
(PS) appear to diverge from the focal point (F) after refraction.
(iii) If the direction of the light ray is reversed then it goes back through
the way it came. Therefore, if any ray goes (Figure 9.20, SP) towards
the focus then it will be refracted in parallel with the principle axis.
Now we can find out how the image of an object will be in a concave lens.
Suppose an object XY is kept near a concave lens. (Figure 9.20) To make the
analysis easy, we have taken the point Y of that object on the principle axis YR.
To find where the image of a point will be formed, at least two rays should be
drawn from that point. But we can find the image of Y without drawing two rays.
It is possible to draw a ray along the principle axis YR, so we know the image of
this point will be formed on this axis. We will get the image of point Y if we
260 Physics

draw a normal on this axis from image of X.

Imagine two rays from point X, one is XP which is incident on the lens in
parallel with the axis. This will diverge when emerged and will appear to
diverge from the focus, so if a line is drawn from the focus F to P and
elongated, then we’ll find

that ray. Let us draw the

second ray from point X i S
towards the center of the x P

lens. According to the
tules of thin lenses it will
emerge directly along the
direction of XT. The point
where XT and FS
intersect each other is the
image X of X. If we draw
a normal from X' on the

axis we will get the image
X' Y'of XY. Figure 9.20 : An object looks small in a concave
lens

The things which are seen in the case of convex mirror are true in the case of
concave lens.

(a) Its position will be in between the center and focus of the lens.
(b) It is virtual

(c) It is erect.

(d) It is small.

9.4.2 Convex Lens

The images in convex lens are amazing. The image which we got from a
concave mirror, is the same as the images in a convex lens. We have seen in the
case of a convex mirror that if a parallel ray falls on it, then it converges at the
focal point. The same thing happens in the case of a convex lens, if parallel rays
fall on it, they will meet at the focal point (Figure 9.21) and again spread out.

Therefore, using previous logic we can say that if light diverges from a point and
the source of the divergent light (Figure 9.22) is placed in the focal point of a
lens, then while passing through the lens, rays of light will emerge as parallel

2025
2025

Refraction of light 261

rays (in the case of light, it is always true that if the light goes from A to B and if
the direction of the ray is changed, it will always go from B to A). Now let us find
the position of the image for different positions of an object .

—— focal length «— —+ focal length <—

Figure 9.21: When passing through a Figure 9.22: If the light spot is kept
convex lens, parallel rays of light at the focal point ,the converging lens
converge at the focal point. makes the rays parallel.

Before starting, let us learn how light ray refracts in a convex lens. If we know
three special rules of the refraction of light through convex lens, we can describe
how the image is formed .

(i) Ifthe rays of light is centripetal (Figure 9.23, YO or XO ray) it goes

straight after refraction.

(ii) The rays which are parallel with the principle axis, (Figure 9.23, XO) will

(CT) pass through focal point (F) after refraction.

(iii) If the direction of the light ray is reversed then it goes back the way it
came. Therefore, if any ray goes (Figure 9.23, TC) through the focus then
it will be refracted in parallel (CX)

Now we can form the image for a convex lens.
262 Physics

The distance less than Focal length

Imagine an object XY, which is kept between the lens and the focal point (Fig-
ure 9,23). By the same logic described before, we can say that the image of point
Y will be formed on YOF line. Ifa perpendicular is drawn from the image of X
on this axis, we’ll get the position of the image of Y.

S

Figure 9.23: A bigger image is seen in a convex lens if the object is placed within the
focal length.

Now let’s draw two rays from the point X. XC line, which is parallel with the
axis will go towards the direction of T through the focal point F. If a ray from
point X is drawn through the center point of the lens, it will go straight along XO
towards S. CFT and XOS will not meet going forward, which means there is no
chance of forming a real image. If the two lines are extended backward, they
will meet at point X', which is the image of X.

The normal which is drawn from the point X'on the line YF touches YF at the
point Y'. This is the image of point Y.

The closer the XY object is to the lens ,the bigger the image will be. The closer
the object is to the focal point F, the bigger the image will be. When the object
will be exactly on point F, the size of the image will be infinite. Now we can say,
if an object is kept between the center of the lens and the focal point of a convex
lens, the image of the object:

(a) Will be formed in the same direction as the object.
(b) Will be virtual.

(c) Will be erect and

(d) Will be big.

2025
2025

Refraction of light 263

Outside the focal length

Now let’s see what happens if the object is kept outside the focal length. Three
different things can happen in this case, like in a concave mirror. (i) The object
is outside the focal length but inside twice of the focal length. (ii) The object is
outside twice of the focal length and (iii) The object is exactly on the twice of the
focal length. Let’s examine this
one by one.

(i) First, the object will be kept
outside the focal length but
inside twice of the focal
length. In Figure 9.24, the
image of the point Y of the
object XY will be on the YO
line. So, we find the image
of the point X, as before.
The ray from point X which is
parallel to the axis will
go through the focal Figure 9.24: If he object is at the outside the
point F. Another ray will focal length but inside the twice of the focal
pass through the center length, the real, inverted and bigger image is
point along line XO. formed.

The point X', where the two

lines meet, is the image of point X. If a normal is drawn from X' to the axis
YO, then the point will be the position of the image of the point Y. Therefore, for
the image of XY. we can say :

(a) The position of the image will be outside twice of the focal length
(b) It is real

(c) It is inverted

(d) It is bigger than the size of the object

(ii) Now let’s see what will happen if the object is kept outside twice of the focal
length. It is seen that if the object XY is kept at exactly twice of the focal length
(Figure 9.25), then the size of the image will be same as the object XY and the
position of the object will be at the same distance from the center of the lens.
The closer the object will be brought to the focal point, the further away the
264 Physics

image will be formed, and the size of it will start to increase. As the ray of light
actually goes through the image, it is a real image and it is seen clearly in the
picture that the image is inverted i.e:

x!

! 2f 1 f bk-f—

Figure 9.25: If the object is placed at a distance twice the focal length, the
size of the image will be same as the object.

(a) The position of the image will be on the twice of the focal length
(b) It is real

(c) It is inverted

(d) It is the same size as the object

(iii) Now let's see if the object is
placed outside at a distance
twice of the focal length. Where
and what kind of image of the
object is formed?

The process of drawing this
image is the same as the
previous one but (Figure 9.26)
the object is to be drawn outside
twice of the focal length. We 1

know that if the object is kept on
twice of focal length, then a = Figure 9.26: If the object is placed at outer
side of the twice of the focal length then

small, inverted, real image is formed.

same size image is formed at the
same distance.

2025
Refraction of light 265

As the object is gradually moved away, the image becomes smaller and starts to
come closer the focal point. If the object is brought to infinity, the image of it will
be formed exactly on the focal point. Therefore, if an object is kept at the
distance outside twice of the focal length, then the image is :

(a) Between the focal length and twice of the focal length

(b) Real

(c) Inverted

(d) Small

Example

Question: If an object is kept outside twice of its focal length, then a real image
of the object is formed. If the object is kept at the position of the image, then where
will the image be formed?

Answer: If the direction of the light ray is changed, then one is converted to another.

Do Yourself

~\

If the light from a distant object falls on a lens, then it forms its image on
the focal point of the lens. Using this process you can find the focal length of
a convex lens. In order to do it you should move the lens forward and
backward until a distinct image is formed on the wall. When the image is
distinct, then measure the distance from the lens to the wall. This is the focal
length of this lens.

If you don’t have any convex lens, you can do the experiment using the glass
of spectacle. Often the spectacles of elderly people are made with convex
lenses. If closer things are seen bigger by the glass of the spectacle, then
ou’ll understand that it is a convex lens. )

Ne

9.4.3 Power of Lens

The most familiar use of lens is in spectacles. If you have experimented with the
lenses of spectacles of many people, you have seen that many of their spectacles are
made of convex lens, and many are made of concave lens. Usually we explain the
lenses by discussing power.

Forma-34, Physics, Class 9-10
266 Physics

You have certainly heard people say that the power of a lens of somebody is high.
What do we mean by the word power?

The conception of power

comes from the matter of

seeing big and small using a

lens .If we place a body in front

of two different lenses at the

same distance, and the object 7
looks bigger in one lens than in
another lens , then we say the
power of the lens is higher in
which the object looks bigger.
If you think about it you will
see that the smaller the focal
length of the lens, the object is
seen bigger (Figure 9.27).
Therefore the power of a lens P
is inversely proportional to the
focal length. If the focal length
is fin meters then unit of power
P is the diopter. If the power of Figure 9.27 : The lens which have as much as

the glass is 2.5 (Nobody uses mater the focal length , the object is seen to be
diopter in general conversation).

Then the focal length of this
glass will be

bigger

f= 3 = = m = 0.4m (the unit is in meter)

Power is not only used only for convex lens to show bigger objects. In the case of
concave lens the same power is used to show smaller images. In the concave lens in
which the object is seen as much as smaller, the power will be greater or the focal
length will be smaller. In the case of a convex lens the power is positive and in the
case of a concave lens the power is negative.

2025
Q
S
AQ

Refraction of light 267

(?) Exercise

General questions

1. The velocity of light in a denser medium is less. Is there anything which can
go with the velocity greater than the velocity of light?

2. At noon why is rainbow not seen ?

3. Drops of water can work like a lens. What is focal length of this lens ?

Mathematical questions

Figure 9.32: Total reflection angle will be changed if liquid drops of different
refractive index are placed on the point of incidence.

1. If a ray of light passes through glass
having shape shown in Figure 9.32, then
the critical angle of total internal
reflection 65° is found. Due to a drop of
liquid at the point of incidence, total
internal reflection happened at angle
75°. What is the refractive index of the
liquid.

2. The focal length of a convex lens
made of glass is 10 cm. If a lens of
exactly the same size is made of
diamond then what will be its focal
length?

7

=m =

Figure 9.33: An object which is
kept at a point outer side of the
focal length.

3. Draw the rays for object XY and show the position of the image as accurately
as possible (Figure 9.33).
268 Physics

=> =
<= x
paul

{a) (b)

Figure 9.34: (a) An object kept inside of the focal length of a convex
lens (b) an object kept outside of the focal length of a convex lens.

4. Draw the rays for object XY and show the position of the image as accurately
as possible (figure 9.34 a).

5. Draw the rays for object XY and show the position of the image as accurately
as possible (figure 9.34 b).

Multiple choice questions
P 4

Choose the correct answer.
1. Where will the image of an object be when it is placed in a denser medium
and looked at from a rarer medium?
a) raised upward b) gone downward
c) remained at the same place d) moved aside
Answer the questions 2 & 3 from Figure 9.35
2. What is the angle of refraction here?
a) 0° b) 90°
c) 180° d) 45°

=

3. What will happen if the angle of incidence is g by
bigger?
a) Total internal refraction
b) Total internal reflection
c) Refraction and reflection
d) Reflection Figure 9.35

2025
2025

Refraction of light 269

4. The ray diagram usually used to draw the image for a convex lens is —

+ ; + F'
F ine oO} FE F /i\ F'

(!) (ii) (iii)
Figure 9.36
(a)i (b)ii
(c)i & ii (d)i, it & iii
5. Which is the unit of power of a lens?
a) Dioptre b) Watt
c) Horsepower d) Meter

Creative questions

1. Shiuli, a tenth-grade student, has difficulty seeing the writing on the black-
board in the class. After consulting a doctor, she was prescribed glasses with
lenses of -2D power. Her elder brother, Togor, drew a ray diagram to show her
where the image would form for an object positioned 1 meter away from the
lens. He also explained to Shiuli whether the image formed would be real or
virtual.

(a) What is a lens?

(b) How can the nature ofa lens be identified without touching it?

(c) Determine the focal length of Shiuli’s glasses.

(d) Draw the ray diagram illustrated by Togor in the stimulus and analyze his
steps in explaining it to Shiuli.
