2025

Chapter Eleven
Current Electricity

Now-a-days, we cannot spend a single moment properly without electricity. To
operate machines and other instruments around us, we need electricity. In the
previous chapter we discussed static electricity. When charge flows through a
conductor, we call it current electricity or, in brief, electricity. We will describe
the terms required to explain current electricity and learn the rules of flow of
electricity. In this chapter we will also discuss how we can measure electricity in
a circuit and potential difference.
300 Physics

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

e demonstrate the production of current electricity from static electricity.

e explain the direction of electric current and flow of electrons.

e draw a circuit by using the symbols of electric devices and appliances.

e explain conductors, insulators and semiconductors.

e establish a relationship between electric current and potential difference
by using a graph.

e explain fixed resistance and variable resistance.

e explain electromotive force and potential difference.

e explain dependence of resistance.

e explain resistivity and conductivity.

® use series and parallel connection.

e use an equivalent resistance in a circuit.

e calculate electric power in a circuit.

e explain system loss and load shedding in a circuit.

e describe the safe and effective use of electricity.

e draw a typical house circuit and demonstrate the use of AC sources in its
different parts.

e draw a poster to build consciousness about dissipation and conservation
of electricity.

2025
2025

Current Electricity 301

11.1 Electric current

We have discussed in the previous chapter that if two bodies have a
potential difference, then charge flows from the body of higher potential to
the body of lower potential. The flow of charges continues until the
potential becomes equal. This flow of charge is the flow of current or
electricity, which we generally call “electricity”. Using this electricity,
lights turn on, the fan rotates, and the phone charges!

Figure 11.01: Electricity flows from a charged sphere to an uncharged sphere.

11.1.1 Electromotive Force and Potential Difference

You can understand that electricity flows only if there is a potential
difference. If we want to get a continuous flow of electricity, we have to
always maintain a potential difference and cannot let it be equal. If
potential is created using a positive charge in a sphere and then connecting
it with another uncharged sphere (Figure 11.01) by a metal wire, as the
electricity starts flowing, the potential difference will start decreasing and
the potentials will become equal! It is possible to develop a potential
difference between the two plates of a capacitor by accumulating charges
there. But if the plates of the capacitor are connected with a wire, the
potentials will become equal due to flow of charge.

So you can understand that if we want a continuous flow of electricity, we
need some other process which will maintain a potential difference that
will not decrease with the flow of charges. All of you have seen such
technique; these are battery cells or generators. Potential difference is
302 Physics

produced by a chemical reaction inside the battery cell, if the flow of
charge starts, chemical substances start decreasing. When chemical
substances are finished, battery cells cannot create a flow of electricity.
The ordinary battery cells that we see regularly have a potential difference
of 1.5 volt.

For the supply of electricity that you have in your school or residence,
there are two points for using it, one of them is at higher potential and the
other one is at lower potential. This difference in potential is maintained by
a generator, which develops this continuously. A battery cell or a generator
has to send charges continuously from low potential to high potential for
continuous flow of electricity, and for that it needs energy. If W amount of
work is done to bring Q amount of charge from low potential to high
potential in a battery, then the electromotive force or e.m.f of the battery

18S:

EMF =~
Q

A battery cell or a generator which supplies electric energy has an
electromotive force or emf. When a battery cell or a generator is connected
to a circuit, this electromotive force brings the charge through the whole
circuit.

The amount of potential a battery +15V -1.5V
produces is its electromotive force or emf. | |

In English it is called “force” but in
Bengali it is “energy”. Actually, this emf l a
or electromotive force is not force or

energy at all. We said earlier that in

physics terms like “force” and “energy” (a) (b)
are very specific. We cannot use one word Figure 11.02: It is possible to
instead of the other. Unfortunately this make positive and negative

has been done here. But don’t be voltage by a battery cell

confused, because the potential that a battery or generator creates is its
EMF. We said earlier that the magnitude of the potential is not important,

the

2025
2025

Current Electricity 303

difference of it is important. So you will see that the value of potential of
one terminal of a battery cell can be made different, but the difference will
remains the same.

Example

Question: The potential difference of
a battery cell is 1.5V. What is the

“3
actual potential of both terminals? 4 I ] L
Negative is zero and positive is 1.5V? al ‘iil a TT
or negative one is -1.5 V and positive | =
one is zero? Ll i al [

15 3¥ +15

Answer: Both of them can be true. If sy

it is like Figure 11.02 (a) then the

negative is zero and the positive is Figure 11.03: Different positive
1.5 V. But if it is like 11.02 (b) then and negative voltages are made
the positive is zero and the negative is using two battery cells.
-1.5 V.

Example: Make voltage 1.5 V, 3.0 V, -1.5 V, -3.0 V using two 1.5 V battery.

Answer:This is shown in Figure 11.03.

11.1.2 Conductor, Insulator and Semiconductor

Conductor: If we have understood the structure of matter properly, then we
have understood one thing clearly. In solids the atoms and molecules strongly
hold their own positions. If temperature is increased the atoms or molecules start
vibrating, staying at their own position, and don’t move away from their
positions. When you learnt metallic bonds in your chemistry book, you have
seen , some electrons of metal atoms are in a free state which can move from one
place to another. For this reason, those are called conductors. Gold, silver,
copper, aluminum etc. are good conductors. Charge can be transferred through
conductors, but we have to remember that this transfer of charge is done by
304 Physics

electrons; flow of electricity is done by electron, negatively charged electrons!

Insulator: The substance which has no free electron for conducting electricity is
called an insulator. Plastic, rubber, wood, glass are examples of insulators.
Mainly, non-metals are insulators.

Semiconductor: There are some substances whose conductivity lies between
insulators and conductors at normal temperature, but their conductivity
increases with the rise of temperature. These types of substances are called
semiconductors. Silicon or germanium examples of semiconductors.
Semiconductor are elaborately discussed in the last chapter of this book.

11.1.3 Direction of electric flow

We have seen that if two bodies of different potentials are connected by a
conductor, charge starts flowing and it continues until the potentials become
equal and we say electric current is flowing. Many of you may have started
thinking because when we talked about equalizing two different potentials by
flow of charge, we said that it is true for negative charges, as only negatively
charged electrons can go from one place to another. Then what happens in case
of positive charge? As the positive ions are strongly bounded in their own
positions, how does positive charge move from one place to another?

You may have already realized what happens in that case. The deficiency of
electron is positive charge. So increasing the deficiency by moving electrons
means a supply of positive charge! So, if it is said that in Figure 11.01 positive
charge moves from A to B by flow of electricity, actually it means that electrons
move from B to A.

The flow of charge is electric current. So far, we have tried to understand it
normally. Let us specify it a little bit now. Electric current means the rate of
change of flow of charge with respect to time i.e. if O charge flows in time t, the
electric current is:

(| O

2025
Current Electricity 305

If the unit of charge is the Coulomb (C) and of time is second (t), then the unit
of electric current is ampere A. Interesting thing is, to find the unit of charge we
said, if one ampere electric current flows for one second then the amount of
charge that flows is called 1 Coulomb. Electric current is the rate of flow of
charge; if 1 ampere current flows from A to B, it means 1 coulomb positive
charge has been moved from A to B. Which actually means that the amount of
electrons equivalent to 1 Coulomb charge has been moved from B to A.
Therefore, you see that the direction of electric current is opposite to the
direction of flow of electrons. (All problems could have been solved if we
assume the charge of electron is positive, but it has been too late!)

11.2 Relationship between Potential Difference and Electricity

Now we will discuss actual flow of current in a real circuit. We have said before
that if there is a potential difference between two points and if we connect these
two points with a conducting wire, electric current will start flowing between the
points, though we haven't discussed the amount of electric current. Not only that,
will the amount of current that flows if the connection is made by a gold wire be
equal to the current that will flow through the connection made by an iron wire?

11.2.1 Ohm’s Law

To see the relationship between
potential difference and electric
current we can do an experiment.
The equipment used for measuring
voltage is called a voltmeter, and
the equipment used for measuring
current is known as ammeter.
(Actually the same equipment can
be used sometimes as a voltmeter
and sometimes as an ammeter by
turning a switch.) Let us take a few
battery cells. If the voltage for one
battery cell is 1.5 V, for two cells it
will be 2x1.5 = 3 V, for three cells it

will be 3x1.5 = 4.5 V. We can apply Figure 11.04: Current flow relative to
different potential differences in potential difference due to resistance

Forma-39, Physics, Class 9-10
306 Physics

this way. Not only this, we can also change the direction of the potential
difference by reversing the cells. So if we apply different positive and negative
potential differences between two sides of a wire or some other conductor and
try to measure the current that flows, we will see that

a) The higher the potential difference the higher the current flow.

b) If potential difference is negative, the electric current also changes

direction.

If we put the result of the experiment on a graph, it will be like figure 11.04 (a):

Therefore,
Iav

If we do the same experiment by using a wire of some other materials, we will get
similar results. But the slope of the straight line may be different. (Figure
11.04(b)) Now if we analyze the results of these two experiments, we will
understand that for a certain potential difference, the current that flows through
the first conductor is more than the current that flows through the second
conductor for the same potential difference. It is as if the flow of current is easier
through the first conductor and a little difficult through the second one. To
explain the matter, a quantity named ‘resistance to current flow’ or simply
‘resistance’ has been introduced. We can see that the relation between voltage
and electric current can be expressed by a law which is known as Ohm’s law.

fd
—R

So, the higher the resistance, the lower is the electric current. And the lower the
resistance, the higher is the current.

The unit of resistance is Ohm and it is expressed by the Greek letter Q. If 1 V
potential difference is applied in an electric circuit and if it is seen that 1 A
current flows as a result, it can be said that the resistance of the circuit is 1 Q.

Example

Question: To make fun you can write Ohm’s law differently:

2025
2025

Current Electricity 307

After writing in big font size, cover any of ¥ J or R with finger. The value of
the covered one will be obtained from the uncovered ones.

Answer: It is shown in fig 11.05.

' voy &
IXR * PRN IXR

Figure 11.05: Ohm’s law can be used by this figure. The value of the covered
quantity by the finger can be expressed by the two other quantities.

11.2.2 Resistance

Resistance is the obstacle to the flow of current. So the more the length of a
material L, the higher is the hindrance, and resistance.

REL

Again current can flow more easily through a wide path than through a narrow
path. So, the higher the cross sectional area A of a conductor, the lower is the
resistance.

Roo
A

If we want to write these two things as an equation rather than in proportional
form, a constant p has to be used. So, resistance R is,

L
R=p7Z

Where the constant p is, p= Re
308 Physics

For a certain material, p is specific

resistance and its unit is Q m. Table 11.01 : Specific resistance of matter

Matter | Specific resistance (Qm)

To measure how conducting a Silver 1.59 x 10-8
substance. is, A in term failed Copper 1.68 x 10-8
conductivity o has been introduced. =8
The more a substance is electrically Gold 2.44 x a
conducting, the more isthe value of the Graphite 2.50 x 10
electrical conductivity. It is reciprocal Diamond 1.00 x 102
to the specific resistance o. (Table Air 1.30 x 1016
11.01)

1

o=-
p

The unit of conductivity o is: (Q m)~1

We have to remember one thing; the resistance of a substance is the hindrance
to electron flow.

The more the atoms and molecules vibrate the more the barrier the electrons will
face while going through them. In other words, the more the resistance. As the
vibrations of the atoms and molecules increases with the increase in
temperature, so the specific resistance of a conducting substance also increases
with temperature. So the temperature has to be specifically mentioned while
expressing resistance or specific resistance of a substance.

Fixed Resistance: Resistors with a definite value are used in different circuits.
They can be of different shapes and of different types. The resistances that are
used in laboratory uses, generally the value of the resistances are expressed by
using bands of different colors on them. How much electric power they can
tolerate is also specified along with the value of the resistance.

| 4 4
a) (b)
Figure 11.06: (a) Fixed and (b) variable resistors

NL)

[
|
|

2025
2025

Current Electricity 309

Variable Resistance: Sometimes an electric circuit needs a resistance, the value
of which can be changed as per need. The type of resistance, whose value can be
changed within a certain limit, is called a variable resistance or a Rheostat. A
fixed resistance has two ends, whereas a variable resistance has an additional
terminal in the middle, where the changed value of the resistance is obtained. It
is shown in Figure 11.06.

Example

Question: The specific resistances p of silver, copper, tungsten and nichrome
wire are 1.6x10°, 1.7x10°*, 5.5x10°, 100x10° Q m respectively, Using a wire
of 1 m? cross sectional area, make a 1 Q resistance.

Answer:
We know, R= pl
A
where, LZ is the length and A is the cross-sectional area.
So,
RA 1x1 1
L=-=—= -_
For Silver, Pp Pp
1
= = 7
L = Taq = 025% 107 m
For Copper,
1
= = 7
L = Tay = 8:9 % 107 m
For Tungsten,
1
= = 7
L = say qps = 18107 m
For, Nichrome L= 1 — 108
~ 700x108 ™

You can see, to create a 1 QO resistance, the length has to be very very long
(almost 1 Lac kilometer). Practically, very thin wires are used, so A = 1 m? is not
usually feasible. If we fix the radius as 0.1 mm, then how long will a wire need
to be to make a 1 O resistance?
310 Physics

We know, RA

A = ar? = n(10-*)*m?2 = 3.14 x 1078 m2

3.14 x 1078
For silver, = Texi08 ~ 1.96 m
For copper, _ 314x107 10° = 1.84
° ~q7x10-8
3.14 x 1078
For tungsten, = exo 0.57m = 57 cm
-8
For Nichrome, = eat = 0.03m = 3cm

If the temperature of a conductor is raised, its resistance increases, but the case
is the opposite for a semiconductor. The resistance decreases if the temperature
goes up in a semiconductor. The reason is, there are free electrons in a conductor
for the flow of current, but a semiconductor does not have free electrons. If the
temperature is raised, some electrons are found for the flow of current, so a
temperature rise causes the decrease of resistance of a semiconductor.

11.2.3 Circuit

lf we have understood Ohm's law, we should be able to analyse circuits now.
Before that, let us introduce some of the symbols that are used in circuits:
(Figure 11.07)

Every substance has some resistance, but we do not consider the resistance of
electrical wires while using them in circuits in our daily life. When a resistance
is needed, we use different resistances prepared in special ways. Sometimes we
use such resistances for some special purposes, where even their magnitudes
can be changed, these are called variable resistance or rheostat.

2025
2025

Current Electricity 311

To analyze a circuit, some simple points discussed below are to be remembered:

Cell —|}+—— One way switch ——~e—— _ Variable resistor WV mn

heostat
Battery ——\\|}— Two way switch —_vT__ or maeostal
Fixed resistor —-A\\WW—
AC source ) Fuse —
Galvanometer. —-(G)—

Bulb
Crossed wire a u -- —~&)- eter
Connecting wire ———— Capacitor + L-
Voltmeter ——(V}—

Wire not —- Coil oll 1010101010 [0s Earth connector tl

connected
Figure11.07: Some symbols that are used in a circuit.

(a) The amount of current that comes out from the higher potential of a source
(battery cell, generator whatever may be) after flowing through the entire circuit,
just the same amount of current comes back to the lower potential.

(b) The amount of current that enters at any point of a circuit, the same amount
of current will come out from that point, that is, there is no creation or

destruction of current in a circuit. No charge is created here, only transfer of
charge occurs.

(c) In a circuit Ohm's law is true for two points in any part, that is, if the potential
difference of those two points is divided by the resistance of that part, the current
flowing through the circuit can be determined.

ae
A 6 A = B
y= ) S R —z :) S A
D = c D c
ta) (b)

Figure 11.08: Two circuits with a battery cell and a resistor.
312 Physics

Now we are ready to analyse a circuit. We may think that we have understood
the circuit completely if we can find out the potential difference in any part of
the circuit and how much current is flowing through that part. There may be
many components in a circuit like battery cell, resistance, capacitor, diode,
transistor etc. But now we will analyze the circuit composed of only the battery
cell and resistance. In a circuit, resistances are connected with copper wires,
though we have seen that copper wire has a specific resistance. But in reality, the
resistance of the connecting wires is very small with respect to the resistances
we use in a circuit, so , we do not consider it at all. We will assume that the wire
has no resistance and the potential is the same over the whole wire.

Now, let us analyse a circuit as shown in figure 1 1.08(a), here, a resistance is
connected to the two terminals of a battery cell with two wires. Since the part CD
is connected to the earth, so we can say that the potential of the lower terminal
of the battery cell is zero. So, the upper terminal of the battery has a potential V
and there is a resistance in part BC, potential difference between two ends of the
resistance is,

V—-O0O=V

If the resistance is R, the current I flowing through it will be,
I= V
R

So, current I comes out from point A of the battery and enters into point B. We
have determined the voltage and current at every point of the circuit.

Let us assume in the same circuit, if we connect AB part with the earth rather
than part DC (Figure 11.08(b)) what will happen then? As the voltage of the
battery cell is V volt, so the potential difference between A and D must be V, as
the voltage of A is zero, so the voltage of D must be -V. Therefore, the potential
difference between B and C has to be,

0-(-V)=V
Resistance is R, so electric current:
I= V
~R

This is the same as the previous value, which is what it is supposed to be. See,
the magnitude of the potential has changed but the difference is the same.

2025
Current Electricity 313

Example

Question: Determine the voltage at the points A, B, C and D of the circuit in
figure 11.09 (a).

Solutions: Voltage at C and D is 0, voltage at A is 3V. To calculate the voltage at
B, current I of the circuit has to be determined.

pave 3 A=1.0A
“RR 14+2° °° 7

So, the reduction in voltage from A to B is,
V=RI=1QxX1A=1V
So, voltage at pointB, 3V—1V=2V

As the voltage (potential) at all points has been found, verify whether
Ohm's law works or not?

19 AANA, 8 _AMA-—o £

A 8

Vv iY =e 5 ra ros Va
=

C

$

| Va

fa} 1]

Figure 11.09: Two circuits composed of a battery and more than one resistor.

Question: Determine the voltages at the points A, B, C, D and E of the circuit

in figure 11.9 (b).
Solution: Voltage at D is zero

Voltage at Ais 6V

Forma-40, Physics, Class 9-10
314 Physics

What may be the voltage at E, how can it be determined, many of us may be
confused about this. Actually the case is very simple. When current flows
through a resistance, the voltage changes. There is no chance of current flow in
this part BE of the circuit. It can go nowhere after reaching E starting from B.
So, the voltage at B and E (and any point between them) does not change, the
voltage at B remains the same at E.

To determine the voltages of B and E, the current has to be determined. If
current is I, then V 6V 1

T=F-so4e100+150 5%

So, voltage difference from A to B, 1

So, the voltage at A is 6V and 1V less at B so, the voltage at B is,
6V-V,=6V-1V=5V
As the voltage of point B is 5 V, then the voltage of point E is also 5 V. Similarly,

1

The voltage at C is 2 V less than voltage of point B. So, voltage of point C is,
5V-2V=3V

We have said earlier that the voltage of point D is zero. This can also be verified.
The voltage of point D is less than point C by V,.

1
Vz = R3l =15Qx=A=3V

5

So, voltage of point F B c

D = 3V- 3V = 0, as mentioned [—*

earlier. rh a | R230 \3 Ry 60

5|__ S|

Question: Determine the value of — i F

I] and 12 in the circuit shown in Figure 11.10: A circuit where two
figure 11.10. resistors are connected in parallel.

Solution: Voltage at points A, B and C is 2V.
Voltage at points D, E, F is 0 volt. So, the current through the resistor BE,

2025
2025

Current Electricity 315
The current through resistor CF,

Total current, 2 1
P=ht+th=ZAt ZA=1A

11.2.4 Equivalent Resistance: Series Circuit

If there is more than one resistance in a circuit, we will see how these resistances
can be considered as a single equivalent
resistance. In figure 11.11 there are two A B
resistances in the circuit, as C is connected to WW

the ground so it’s potential is zero and
the potential of A is V. We don’t know the Y =~
potential of B, but we know that the same
amount of electric current I flows through R,
and R,,. wel c
To keep it simple, we can say, the sum of two -
resistances is the total resistance R and the
current will be 7= V/(R ), but let us prove this
rather than writing it.

Let us assume the potential at point B is V,,
then for the first resistance R, we can write:

Ry

Ra

WWW

Figure 11.11: Two resistances
connected one after another in a
circuit.

V-V,
l= 5
Ry

Again we can write for the second resistance R,:

ve 0 _Ye
OR, Re
Therefore,
V—-Y, V;
l= B_ 8

Ry R2
316 Physics

(V —Vp)R2 = VeRi
Vp(R, + R2) = VRz

R
Therefore, =
Ve R, +R, v
Ie Ve OV
Ra Ry +R

We can imagine resistances R, and R, as a single resistance R, where

il
‘|
il

ps

Figure 11.12: Many successive resistances or resistors connected in
a circuit can be imagined as an equivalent resistance or resistor.

If there were more than two resistances (figure 11.12) then also we would be able
to show that these resistances can be combined as a single resistance R which
will be the sum of all those resistances. This is called the equivalent resistance.
This means when a circuit will have R,, R,, R, ... resistances successively (series
circuit) then the equivalent resistance will be:

11.2.5 Equivalent resistance: Parallel circuit

Now we will place the resistances in parallel instead of one after another (Figure
11.13). In this circuit we have named different points as A, B, C, D, E and
F, We can understand from the figure that points D, E and F are connected to the
ground and so their potentials are zero. So the potential of points A, B, and C is
V.

2025
2025

Current Electricity 317

Current J flows from the battery
cell. This current goes to point B and
splits into two parts J, and I, and A B C
flows through the resistances R, and I—>
R, respectively, then at point E the
currents converge into J and go back
to the battery as J. We have already
said that the current comes from the —|
battery and flows through the circuit F

and then goes back to the battery. No =
electric current can be created or
destroyed except this in a circuit. So

<=
|
|
<—
VW
=
—
WW
aa

Figure 11.13: Two parallel resistances are

shown in a circuit.
I = i, + I,

Now we can find J, and J:

Therefore,

l=ht+h=7+,=V(-+7)
RR Ra ARa RR

So in this case also, we can define an equivalent resistance R, where

(aX omg to 243
~R Me RR, Rp
= A Ry R, mm > = Rg

Figure 11.14: Many parallel resistances or resistors can be imagined as a single
equivalent resistance or resistor.
318 Physics

If the resistances are more than two (Fig. 11.14) then the equivatent resistance
R will be

11.3 Electric Power

When discussing potential, we saw that if a charge is moved by applying
a potential then some work is done or some energy is lost. So if V potential is
applied to move a charge Q in a circuit then the amount of work done (or the

applied energy) is W =VOQ Joule
Power P is the capacity of work done per second, so if Q charge is moved in ¢
time then w vQ

= L = a = VI Watt

If we use this on a single resistance R, then applying Ohm’s law we can write,
since

V=RI
P=PR
or V
T=R
therefore, V2 v2
p=(5) R=q

If electricity flows through a resistance for time ¢, then Pt energy is supplied there.
Where does this energy go? When you use a resistance in a circuit and if you
pass enough electricity through this resistance, then you will notice that it
always gets hot. That means the electrical energy evolves as heat energy.

The use of bulbs with filaments are getting scarce, because the filament has to be
heated to create light with this. A big part of the electric energy is used to heat up
the filament, and energy is wasted. If we touch these bulbs with our hand we can
feel how much heat energy is created, and this energy is created as PR or V*/R in
every second.

This is not the only place where the electrical energy is used to create heat

2025
2025

Current Electricity 319

energy. It provides energy for the fan, fridge, television, computer, charger
and different types of equipment for different purposes. We can find out how
much electrical energy is consumed per second in electrical appliances very easily
from VI. Every house has an electric meters. It continuously measures potential
(V) and what amount of current is flowing (/). From there it can determine how
much electrical energy (P=VJ) is provided in each second in the house.
Multiplying this with the total time we can find the total electrical energy spent.
The conventional unit of electrical energy spent is kilowatt-hour (kW-h). This
unit is called Board of Trade Unit (BOT) or briefly, Unit. The electric bill we pay
is calculated in this unit.

Example

Question: What is the resistance of the filament of a 100 W bulb?
Answer: 100W is written on a 220V bulb, as

y2
P = R
Therefore,
= v = (220)? OQ = 4840
~ PP 100 "
How much current is flowing here?
_ V _ 220 = 0454
R484

It can be done in other ways too: P = VI

_P_ 100 _ vasa
“VY 220.

Question: If a bulb of 60 Watts is lit everyday for 5 hours for 30 days then what
would be the electric energy usage? If each unit has a price of 10 taka, then what
will be the total cost for this electricity?
320 Physics

Answer: We know, spent energy = (P x t) /1000 kilowatt-hour or unit
P= 60W and t= 5x 30 hour
Spent energy = 60 x (5 x 30)/1000 unit=9 unit

Total cost of electricity with 10 taka per unit = 9 x 10 taka = 90 taka

11.4 Electrical Supply

When current needs to be transmitted from one place to another in a country, it
is transformed into a very high voltage. This is done to reduce the loss of
electricity in electrical wires. You know that, the amount of energy wasted per
second as heat energy is equal to ?R , so we may conclude that there would be
no dissipation of energy as heat energy if there was no resistance R in electrical
wires.

But that is not practically possible; everything has some resistance. That is why,
if current I can be reduced, the energy lost PR due to heat can also be reduced.
Since the amount of electrical energy supplied per second is VJ, if the
potential is increased by 10 times, it is possible to supply the same energy using
10 times less current. If 10 times less current is supplied, 100 times less heat
energy will be dissipated. This is because the resistance R of the wire is the same
in both cases.

Now you may think that the loss of heat energy can also be written as V’/R and
in that case the heat energy loss will be 100 times due to 10 times increase of
voltage. It is to be remembered that when we found the energy loss per second
as V*/R, we then saw V was the potential difference between the two sides of the
resistance. The V which we are discussing here is not the potential difference
between the two sides of the wire. It is the value of potential of the electric wire!
The value of the potential on two sides of the electrical wire is almost equal. So
the difference is negligible.

11.4.1 System Loss of Electricity

We know that the power plants situated at different parts of the country produce
electricity. This electricity is to be transmitted to different of the country. To
distribute electricity, first it is transmitted to the substations of different areas.
The electrical energy is then distributed to consumers using electricity
distribution systems.

2025
Current Electricity 321

The conducting wires that are used to carry electricity from one place to other
have at least some minimum resistance. When current (J) flows through a
resistance (R), heat (PR) is generated and this is loss of electrical energy. This
loss is called system loss. We have already discussed that if electricity is
supplied at high voltage then for a definite electrical energy, loss is reduced
because of resistive heat energy. That is why electricity produced in the power
plants is transformed into high voltage using step up transformers. Before
distributing the electrical energy for customer use, the electrical supply is again
brought down to a suitable voltage using a step down transformer.

11.4.2 Load Shedding
Each power plant produces a definite amount of electric energy and electricity

produced in all power stations is added to the national grid. We have discussed
earlier that electricity is distributed to consumers from local substations. The
national grid supplies electricity as per the needs of different areas. If the
demand of electricity in an area is more than the electricity produced, then
naturally the required electricity cannot be supplied in that area. Then the
substations are forced to keep electricity supply off in one area to be able to
supply electricity to another area. This process is called load shedding. When the
substation gets the required electricity supply again, it distributes electricity to
that area again.

If load shedding is to be done for several hours at a stretch, to make load
shedding tolerable, the authority load sheds in a rotation, in different areas at
different times.

11.5 Safe Use of Electricity

We cannot think of a moment without electricity. Electricity brings light to our
house, keeps us cool in the summer by using fans. We watch television and use
computers using electricity. Electricity runs fridges that preserve food. We use
it to iron clothes. When the charge of mobiles gets low, we use electricity to
charge the battery. Rich people use AC in their houses, washing machines to
wash clothes, and electric heaters to cook. They prepare warm meals by heating
using microwave ovens.

We can go on telling all day about the uses of electricity in our houses, schools,
colleges, fields, farms, industries and hospitals etc. In our country, generally
220V (AC) electricity is supplied, which can give electric shock to people and

Forma-41, Physics, Class 9-10
322 Physics

may even cause death from those shocks. That is why all electrical appliances
are made in such a way that no one comes in direct contact with those things.

If electricity passes directly through the heart then only 10 mA of current can
cause death. The electricity we use for different purposes is AC. The resistance
of dry skin of human beings is around 100,000 Q which decreases by a thousand
times when

it gets wet. So from Ohm’s law we can show that the 220 V electricity of our
country can easily produce fatal current flows. A person with a wet feet standing
on a wet floor has the worst possible condition of getting an electric shock.

When a person is electrocuted, he can’t move hands and legs because of the
current flowing through his body. As a result, in spite of having the sense to
move away from the dangerous condition, he or she won’t be able to do it.

The electricity we use can be dangerous, but if we follow some general
precautions we can safely use electricity, and millions of people around the
world are doing so. We should know the following for safe use of electricity:

(a) Electrically insulated cover: Open wire carrying electricity is dangerous,
so it is always covered with plastic or another insulator. If short circuit occurs for
any reason i.e. positive and negative wires touches without any resistance then,
according to Ohm’s law, a large amount of current flows, the wire become
heated, the plastic burns and can even cause fire. So it should be taken care that
insulating layer remains unaltered and intact.

(b) Better Connection: The electrical connections should be made correctly
where electrical equipment run using huge amount of electricity. If the
connections are not properly done, extra resistance is produced and according to
FR, it may be heated, may burn the insulating layer, and can damage the
electrical connection.

(c) Humidity: Water is conductor of electricity, so if water enters any circuit, it
may be dangerous due to short circuit. A hair drier or electric iron is very
dangerous to use near water, because if it falls suddenly in the water and anyone
touches it, an accident may occur by electrocuting the person.

(d) Circuit breaker and fuse: Major accidents of electricity occur when a
large amount of current flows suddenly due to some defects. To stop sudden
large flows, circuit breakers or fuses are used. A circuit breaker is made in such
a way that if a large amount of current flows (more than the safer level), it breaks
the circuit. A fuse is a comparatively simple method; the amount of current that

2025
2025

Current Electricity 323

flows through equipment is passed through a thin wire before entering the
equipment. The thin wire (where the resistance is more, so PR is more i.e. more
heat) of the fuse becomes heated and burnt, and stops the supply of electricity if
for any reason excess current tries to flow.

(e)Flow less connection: There are always two wires in an electric supply line,
one with high potential (Live) and another is voltage less neutral (Neutral).

source of
“ electricity

neutral ~ neutral
Figure 11.15: Wrong and correct connection of switch.

When a machine is used, then starting from the live wire the electricity passes
through the machine and then returns to the source through the neutral
wire. A voltage less neutral wire is safe, but a high voltage wire should be used
cautiously. When a switch is used to connect electricity to a machine, it can be
connected with a high voltage wire or a neutral wire. It is wise to connect the
switch with the high voltage wire (Figure 11.15). Then high voltage enters the
machine only when the switch is on. When the switch is off, there is no high
voltage inside the machine.

(f) Ground: You may have noticed that there are at least two connections in an
electric supply in school or at home, high voltage and neutral. But if an
expensive machine (e.g. computer, fridge) is connected to the current, you will
see that besides high potential and neutral, there is another third connection,
which is the ground. Generally this is connected to the body or cover of the
machine. If the machine is electrified accidentally, then current directly flows
from the cover or body to ground. A fuse burns due to this flow of electricity and
makes the machine safe. So, if anyone accidentally touches it, he is not
electrocuted.
324 Physics

Figure 11.16: Dangerous activities with electricity.

@) Do Yourself

[Make a list of the dangerous activities done with electricity in Figure 11.16. ]

11.6 Design of Circuit in Residence

What a circuit should be like for supplying electricity in a household is shown
in Figure 11.17. Electricity is supplied at home from a power station through a
supply cable. Between them, one is live; another is neutral. The live line has high
voltage, the neutral has zero voltage. The live line is marked red and the neutral
line is marked blue in the figure. It first passes through an electric meter. This
meter records how much electricity is consumed. After the meter, it is supplied
through a consumer unit.

Three circuit breaker or fuse of SA, 1SA and 30A is shown in Figure 11.17.
These three circuit breakers are connected to the main switch. The electric
supply of the whole house can be cut off using the main switch.

2025
2025

Current Electricity 325

In the figure, current is supplied to the lights and fan from the 5A circuit breaker.
15A is connected with cooking burner. 30A circuit breaker is connected to the
plug points of the house. We have certainly noticed that this part is like a ring
which means flow of current can be through two different paths. In this part the

ground is shown differently (green color).

NEUTRAL CONSUMER INIT
LIVE J
GROUND ooo] fe] |
os) (] 5A ie ISA i!
N L earth
Supply —] 7 ] a
Cable of cooker
(crac) | E
WW
LIGHTING CIRCUIT H f L
on™ LE. Ni ‘
& FAN CIRCUIT Sockets Bo}
ou L

A. el

Figure 11.17: Possible circuit for supplying electricity to a house.

@) Do Yourself

What steps should be taken to minimize the dissipation of electricity?
Describe these in a nice poster.

To create awareness among all with the posters, make arrangements to
display them.

326 Physics

@) Do Yourself

( Obj ective: Students will be able to analyze the electric circuit design )
suitable for use in residence.
Working procedure: A probable circuit for supply of electricity in
residence is shown in Figure 11.17. Make a new circuit by doing the
following changes in this circuit.
(a) Add two more plug points since three plug points are not enough.
(b) Add a water pump with an appropriate circuit breaker which uses
electricity.
(c) Add a second light using two switches in such a way that the light can
be turned on or off by using any of the switches along with the light
and fan.

\ yy,

(?) Exercise
C*) General questions
me

1. Is it possible to use a capacitor as a battery?

2. Why is it difficult to make an experiment to see if the filament of a filament
light bulb is following Ohm’s law or not?

3. Electric current is the flow of electrons. When electricity flows the speed of
electrons is comparatively low. But

electricity flows instantly-how?
4. For equal potential difference,
will a high resistance produce more i
— k— 10cm
= | al m ‘

heat or a low resistance produce
more heat?
5. It is not seen that a crow or a bird
dies on an electric cable, but a big Figure 11.18: Two square resistors of 1 m?
bat often dies why? 3
: . and 100 cm?.
6. What is electric current?

2025
2025

Current Electricity 397

7. What are directions of the conventional current flow and electron flow?

8. What are conductor, insulator and semiconductor materials?

9. State Ohm’s law.

10. Show that, V=ZR using Ohm’s Law.

11. Plot a graph of J versus V on a graph paper for an Ohmic substance.

12. Define specific resistance.

13. Show that, the value of the equivalent resistance of resistors connected in
series is equal to the sum of the different resistances included in the
combination.

14. What are the causes of using electrical energy that can be dangerous?

15. Acurrent of 2.5 A is flowing through the filament of the headlight of a motor
car. If the potential difference between the two ends of the filament is 12 V, what
is the resistance?

16. The electromotive force of a dry cell is 1.5 V. What is the energy spent by the
cell in driving 0.5 C of charge round the circuit?

17. What are fixed and variable resistors?

18. What do you understand by electromotive force and potential difference?

Mathematical questions

1. Make a2 © resistor using infinite number of 1© resistor.

2. Using nichrome sheet of 1 mm thickness, your friend has made a resistor of
10 cm x 10 cm square (Figure 11.18). You have made a resistor of lm <lm
square. What is the value of the resistance made by your friend? What is the
value of your resistance?

A 8
A= 20 5 AMY
Ne
A= 1
a ‘) s Ree 30 pees fs Sen
Aye 10
o ANA :
[aero

=
(@) ()

Figure11.19: Two circuits formed by battery cell and resistors
328 Physics

3. If the point D of the circuit shown in Figure 11.19 (a) is connected with the
earth, what are the voltages at the points A, B, C and D? What is the value of I?

4. If instead of point D, the point C is connected with the earth of the circuit
shown in Figure 11.19 (a), then what is the voltage? What is the magnitude of I?

5. If the point D of the circuit shown in Figure 11.19 (b) is connected with the
earth, what are the voltages at the points A, B, C and D?

ES) Multiple choice questions

Put the tick (V ) mark on the correct answer
1. What are the materials through which electric current can flow very easily?
(a) insulator (b) bad conductor
(c) semiconductor (d) conductor
2. If three resistances of values 2Q ,3Q and 4Q are connected in series, then
what will be the equivalent resistance?
(a) 8Q (b)7
(c) 9Q (d) 20Q
3. The potential difference between the two terminals of a conductor is 100 V. If
the amount of current flowing through it is 10 A, what will its resistance be?

(a) 1000 (b) 0.1 Q
(c) 102 (d) none of them
4. The electrical condition of a circuit is measured by-
i. Voltmeter
il. Ammeter
ili. Generator
Which one is correct?

(a) iand ii (b) i and iii
(c) ii and iii (d) i, ii and iii

2025
Current Electricity 329

Creative questions

1. The length and cross-sectional area of a nichrome wire used in an electrical
heater, is 20 cm and 2 x 10” m? respectively. The resistivity of nichrome is
100 x 10% Qm. The nichrome wire is replaced by a copper wire of identical
length and cross-sectional area. The resistivity of copper is 1.7 x 10% Q m.

(a) What is resistance?

(b) Why does the resistance of conductor increase with increasing

temperature?
(c) Determine the resistance of the copper wire.
(d) Analyze the logic of using copper wire.

2. Alvi uses a bulb of 220V-100W during his studies for 3 hours daily. His
brother Alif uses a table lamp of 220V-40W for 4 hours daily. The cost of each
unit of electrical energy is 3.5 taka.

(a) Write down Ohm’s law.

(b) Explain, what will be the change in resistance of a conductor if the
length is increased by 5 times (provided that the temperature, material
and area of cross-section remain unchanged)?

(c) Determine the current of the lamp used by Alif.

(d) Who is more economical, Alvi or Alif (considering money)? Analyze
with mathematical arguments.

3. The potential difference of an electric supply line in our country is 220 V.
The resistance of the filament of an electric bulb is 484 0 . 220 V- 100 Wis
marked on the bulb.
(a) Define ampere.
(b) What does it mean to say that the electromotive force of a dry cell is
1.5 V?
(c) If the bulb is connected with the supply line, what will be the electric
current?
(d) Propose an experiment to verify 220 V-100 W marked on the bulb.

Forma-42, Physics, Class 9-10
