Chapter One
Physical Quantities and Their Measurements

irae SS

Figure: An Atomic clock made for measuring time very accurately

When you think about science, the image of different instruments, inventions,
research laboratories etc. might appear in your mind. But the instrument,
research or laboratory are not the subject matter of science; the actual subject
matter of science is its scientific view . The greatest contribution of this civilization
has come from science and that came from the scientific view of the human
beings of the world. To explore the mysteries of science, sometimes they are
explained with logic, sometimes examined in laboratories and some other times
they are scrutinized intensively in nature. From the ancient time to modern era the
scientists are relentlessly working to advance science. The gradual development
of physics has been described in this chapter.

Forma-1, Physics, Class 9-10
2 Physics

If we read the history of physics we will see that it is developed by the combined
efforts of both theoretical and experimental scientists. In order to carry out
research in the laboratory, we need to measure different quantities precisely.
This chapter offers discussion of how the measuring units are developed, how
one can measure and what type of instrument are used for measuring them.

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

e explain the scope and gradual development of physics.
e describe the objectives of studying physics.
e explain the physical quantities [with units and magnitude] and the origin of
physics.
e explain the necessity of measurement and units.
e explain the difference between fundamental and derived quantities.
e explain the international system of measuning units.
e calculate the dimensions of quantities.
e calculate the transformation of prefixes of multiple and sub-multiple units.
e express the concepts and theories of physics by using scientific terms,
symbols and signs.
e measure physical quantities using different apparatuses.
e explain the techniques/methods of exactness and accuracy of measurement.
e determine the area and volume of uniform objects by using simple
instruments.
e determine the length, mass, area and volume of uniform objects used
in our daily lives.

2025
2025

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements

1.1 Physics:

Physics is the most ancient branch of science. It is because scientists started
studying and practising astronomy, the most important branch of physics, before
other branches of science had flourished. Besides, being the oldest branch,
physics can said to be the most fundamental branch of science. Chemistry
flourished on the basis of physics. Biology flourished on the basis of Chemistry,
and again, many other subjects flourished on the basis of Biology.

Generally, we can say that the branch of science that tries to understand matter
and energy and the interaction between them is called physics. You must have
realized that here physics does not refer to only the visible things around us but
also the things such as molecules-atoms, electrons, protons, neutrons, quarks or
string etc. Again energy may encompass strong and weak nuclear energy apart
from our known potential energy, kinetic energy, gravitational energy or
electromagnetic energy.

1.2 Scope of physics

Since physics is the oldest and the most fundamental branch and other branches
somehow flourished on the basis of physics, it is very natural that the scope of
physics is very vast. Not only that, different technologies have flourished based
on different laws of physics and we are using these in our daily lives (there are
examples of some instruments used in medical science in the final chapter). At
present the greatest contribution behind civilization is of electronics and physics
has the greatest contribution to this technology also. Besides daily activities,
from destruction of war to space exploration, the contribution of physics is
present. Not only that, by the combination of other branches of science and
physics, newer branches have developed, for example, astrophysics consists of
astronomy and physics. In order to explain organic processes, biophysics has
been built up by the combination of biology and physics, chemical physics was
born by the combination of chemistry and physics. Use of physics in Geology
has developed Geophysics. Medical physics has flourished using physics.
Therefore the area of physics is very vast and deep as well.

For the advantage of teaching-learning we may divide physics into two principal
parts. These are:

Classical Physics: This contains mechanics, sound, heat and thermodynamics,
electricity and magnetism and optics.
4 Physics

Modern Physics: Modern Physics has been developed using Quantum
Mechanics and Theory of Relativity. These are molecular and atomic physics,
nuclear physics, solid state physics and particle physics.

We have mentioned earlier that many kinds of technologies have been
developed in the world using physics or other branches of science. Using these
technologies we have made our lives comfortable and meaningful. The
invention of some dangerous technology has endangered not only our lives but
also the existence of our earth. Sometimes unjustified and unnecessary
technology has destroyed the resources of our earth along with creating
pollution. So remember that technology is not always good, as there are good
technologis in the world, also there are bad technologis. Using your conscience,
you have to understand which technology is good or bad.

Physics was not built in a single day, it took hundreds of years to develop. The
physicists tried to explain, with the help of laws, the mysterious world around
them. Sometimes those laws were accepted, changed or rejected through
experiments. Thus, we are able to explain microscopic particle of matter to shape
of largest universe and we are learning continuously. Perhaps this learning is not
complete still now- scientists are trying to make it complete, it will be possible
to explain everything of apparently different subject with the help of a few laws
one day.

@) Do Yourself

Technology may be good or bad but knowledge can never be bad. In the light
of invention of physics give logical arguments in favour of this.

Group Work

Arrange a debate on good technology and bad technology that have been
developed using the laws of physics.

1.3 Development of physics

Modern civilization is the contribution of science. This advancement of science
has not been achieved in a day. The modern science reached its present state

2025
2025

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements

gradually following tireless labour of innumerable scientists and researchers. It
has to be remembered that, in ancient time the exchange of information was not
so easy, it was very difficult to convey the results of research to one another,
books were written by hand form and the number of such books were very few.
Courage was needed to express views against conventional faiths. There are
examples of imprisonment or even scientists being burnt to death. But the search
for knowledge was not stopped and by exploring the mysteries of nature, the
scientists have given us this modern science as a gift.

We can describe the history of physics by dividing it into different stages.

1.3.1 Initial Stage (Greek, Indian subcontinent, China and the
Contribution of Muslim Civilization)

What we understand by physics at present was introduced in the ancient times,
by the combination of astronomy, optics, dynamics geometry, and an important
branch of mathematics. The name of the Greek scientist Thales (624-586 BC)
can be mentioned specially, because he was the first to deny explanations which
were only based on religion, myth and extrasensory perception but without logic.
Thales predicted about the solar eclipse and knew about the magnetic property
of loadstone. Pythagoras (527 BC) was remarkable among the mathematicians
and scientists of that time. He had fundamental works on vibrating wire along
with geometry. Greek philosopher Democritus ( 460 BC) presented the idea first
that matter has indivisible units, called atom (This name is used by modern
physics). It was not acceptable to all since there was no chance to prove his idea
by any scientific process. The theory that everything was made of soil, water, air
and fire by the greatest philosopher and scientist of that time, Aristotle was much
more acceptable. Aristarchus (310 BC) first gave the idea of sun centered solar

Figure 1.01: Archimedes and Al Khorgimi
6 Physics

system. His follower Seleucus proved those ideas with arguments, although
these arguments have been lost with time. Greek science and mathematics
reached its peak at the time of Archimedes (287 BC), the greatest scientist of all
times. The upward thrust of liquids is still included in the content of science. He
assisted, during the war, by setting enemy ships on fire by converging the solar
light using a spherical mirror. There was another scientist of Greek era named

Eratosthenes (276 BC), determined the radius of the earth accurately at that time.

After that, the development of science came to a stand-still for almost one
thousand and five hundred years. Only the civilizations of the Indians, Muslims
and Chinese kept practising the study of science following Greek convention. In
the Indian subcontinent Aryabhatta (476), Brahmagupta and Vaskar did a lot of
valuable works on mathematics and astronomy. Zero was effectively used in the
Indian subcontinent (Aryabhatta). The name of Al Khorgimi (783 BC) has to be
specially mentioned among the Muslim mathematicians and scientists. The
present name algebra has come from the book Al Zaber written by him. Ibne Al
Hayum (965 BC) is considered as the founder of optics. Al Masudi wrote an
encyclopedia of thirty parts regarding the history of nature. Everyone knows the
name of Omar Khayam as a poet. But he was a highly famous mathematician,
astronomer and philosopher. Chinese mathematicians and scientists have done a
lot of work in physics. Among them the name of Shen Kuor can be mentioned
( 1031 ), studied magnets and mentioned the technique of finding directions by
using a compass during travel.

1.3.2 Rising Stage of Science

In the sixteenth and seventeenth century, a wonderful revolution started in the
realm of physics. It was the era of European renaissance. In 1543 Copernicus
gave the explanation of the solar centric solar system in a book. (the publisher of
the book became afraid of the priest and wrote that it is not a real explanation,
only a mathematical solution!) The theory was not made available to the people
for a long time, Galileo (1564-1642) brought it to the fore front. He introduced
the mathematical formulation. After that he introduced the scientific process to
prove the law through experiments. Sometimes Galileo is called the father of
modern science. He fell victin of the anger of the church as the founder of solar
centric solar system. He had to pass his last days in captivity. In 1687 Newton
published the three laws of mechanics and the law of gravitational force, which
provided the foundation of force and dynamics. Besider optics and other works
scientist Newton invented a new branch of mathematics called calculus along
with Leibniz.

2025
2025

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements

Figure 1.02: Copernicus , Galileo and Newton

Before the eighteenth century heat was considered a mass-less liquid. In 1768
Count Rumford showed that heat is a kind of energy and mechanical energy can
be converted into heat energy. Lord Kelvin, in 1850, introduced two important
laws of thermodynamics on the basis of the research work of many other
scientists.

An extensive research started on electricity and magnets at that time. In 1778
Coulomb invented the law of force between charges. Many kinds of research
were started after the invention of the electric battery by Volta in 1800. In 1820
Oersted showed that magnets can be made by the flow of electricity. In

1831 Faraday invented just the opposite process given by Oersted. They showed
that electricity can be produced by varying the magnetic field. In 1864 Maxwell
(Figure 1.03) expressed the varying electric and magnetic fields with a single
law, the famous Maxwell equation. Here, he also showed that actually light is an
electromagnetic wave. Electricity and magnets are not different. In fact they are
the two forms of the same energy. This invention was well-timed because in
1801 Young proved the wave nature of light through experiments.

1.3.3. Introduction to Modern Physics

From the very beginning of 19th century scientists felt that many things
could not be explained with the help of existing physics. Dalton introduced
atomic theory in 1803, Thomson invented an electron within the atom, In 1911
Rutherford showed that at the center of the atom, there is the smallest nucleus and
there are positive charges in it. But it was found that the revolving electron
model around the nucleus could not be explained because, according to
electromagnetic theory, an electron should radiate its energy and fall into the
nucleus, but practically it never happens. In 1900, Max Planck introduced
quantum theory, which made it possible to explain black body radiation. Later, scientist
Niels Bohr used quantum theory to explain the stability of the atom. In 1924, scientist
Satyendra Nath Bose applied the concept of quantum theory to develop quantum
8 Physics
statistics related to radiation. For this, he is referred to as the father of quantum
statistics. In recognition of his contributions, a class of fundamental particles was
named "bosons" after him.Between 1900 and 1930, many prominent scientists,

including Heisenberg, Schrédinger, and Dirac, collectively established the quantum
theory of matter.

Figure 1.03: Maxwell, Rutherford and Mari Curie
An imaginary medium called ether was considered as the carrier of the
electromagnetic wave. In 1887 Michelson and Morley, while trying to prove the
existence of ether, showed that actually there is no ether and the velocity of
light is equal in both stationary and moving mediums. We get this explanation
from Einstein’s theory of relativity in 1905. (Fig-1.04) The most wonderful

equation E = mc? is derived from the theory of relativity in which it is shown
that the mass of object can be converted into energy.

In 1931 Dirac hypothesised the existence of an anti particle by the combination

of quantum theory and the theory of relativity and it was discovered the following
year.

a

Figure 1.04: Albert Einstein and Satyendranath Basu

In 1895 Roentgen invented X-rays. In 1896 Becqurel showed that radioactive
radiation is emitted from the centre of an atom. In 1899 Pierre Curie and Marie
Curie (Fig:1.03) invented radium and the scientists understood that actually the

atoms are not imperishable and on disintegrating, these atoms may emit radioactive
radiation .

2025
Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 9

1.3.4 Contemporary Physics

Due to the invention of electronics and modern technology it is possible to make
powerful particle accelerators. Accelerating the particle with high energy, new
particles are being discovered. It is possible to arrange these particles
systematically using the Theoretical Standard Model. It is possible to explain the
structure of all the particles using a few elementary particles (and their
antiparticles) though apparently we think there are an infinite numbers of new
particles. It is not possible to explain the mass of the particles using the Standard
Model, so to explain the mass, the existence of a new particle called the Higgs
Boson was proposed. The identification of the Higgs Boson particle in the
laboratory in 2013 is treated as a great success of theoretical physics.

In 1924 Hubble showed that all galaxies of the universe are moving away from
one another, which indicates that the universe is expanding slowly. This means
that once upon a time the whole universe was concentrated at a point. Scientists
showed that fourteen billion years ago through a massive explosion called the
Big Bang the universe was created and it is continuing to expand. Very recently
scientists showed that this expansion will never stop and every part of the
universe will keep moving away from one another. Besides, the physicist have
shown that they can explain only 4% of visible planets, stars, and galaxies of the
universe, the concept of the mysterious dark matter and dark energy has to be
accepted to explain the rest of the universe. The scientists are continuing their
research in this field.

Semiconductors are created from the research of solid state physics resulting in
present electronics which laid the foundation of modern civilization.

1.3.5 Contributions of Jagadish Chandra Bose

Acharya Sir Jagadish Chandra Bose (Fig: 14.01) was a renowned physicist, as
well as a successful biologist. He was the first internationally recognized
scientist of this subcontinent. The forefathers of Jagadishchandra Bose lived at
the village of Rarikhal of Bikrampur in Dhaka district. He was born in 1858 in
Mymensingh. His father, Bhagaban Chandra Bose, was a _ deputy
magistrate of Faridpur district.

His education started in a rural school of Faridpur. Later he completed his studies
from Hare School and Saint Xavier school and college in Kolkata. After passing
his B.A. in 1880, he went to England, and from 1880-1884 he completed his
honors with BA in Physics from Cambridge University, and then acquired B.Sc.

Forma-2, Physics, Class 9-10
10 Physics

degree from London University. Returning to his motherland in 1885, he became
a professor of physics in Presidency College. In that time there was not enough
scopes for research in that college, but he continued his research anyway.
He was always busy during the day. So, he carried on his research at night.

He conducted a lot of research on how to send radio signals without electric
wires. In 1895, for the first time he sent a wireless radio signal to distant
places and demonstrated this publicly. He has great contributions in microwave
research; he was the first to reduce the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave
to the order of millimeter (nearly 5 mm).
Acharya Jagadish Chandra Bose used
semiconductor junctions to detect radio
signals. Instead of patenting this invention
and obtaining commercial benefits from
it, he opened it for all.

In later years, Jagadish Chandra Bose

discovered many important aspects of plant Figure 1.04(a) Acharya Sir Jagadish

Chandra Bose
physiology. Among those, the invention of the Cresco graph to record the growth

of plants, detecting very minor movements, and matters of responding to various
stimuli are worth mentioning. Earlier it was assumed that response to stimuli
was a chemical process. He showed that it was actually electrical in nature.

In 1917 he established the Bose Biggan Mandir in Kolkata for research on plant
physiology. The writings of Jagadish Chandra Bose in bengali were compiled in
a book named ‘Obyakto’. A significant book of his is ‘Response in the living and
nonliving’. On 23 November 1937, scholar Jagadish Chandra Bose breathed his
last.

1.4 Objectives of Physics

Already you know that physics is that branch of science which explains the
change of position of an object with time in the presence of energy and force.
Like any other science the main objective of physics is to learn, the arena of
knowing in physics is very large. The objectives of physics are to unfold the
mysteries of both small atoms and the vast universe. For understanding easily
we can divide the objectives of physics into three parts:

2025
2025

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 11

1.4.1 Unfold the Mystery of Nature

In ancient times in China, a piece of lodestone was seen to attract another by an
invisible force. This special property of this special type of matter was called
magnetism. Similarly in ancient Greece, when a substance called amber was
rubbed with wool, they would attract each other with an invisible force. This
special type of property is called electricity. Many research were conducted on it
in the eighteenth century and the scientists discovered that, this is actually two
different forms of the same force and this force is called an electromagnetic
force. After the invention of radioactivity while explaining a special radiation
called beta ray, a new type of force called weak nuclear force was discovered.
Later, the physicists showed that electrometric force and weak nuclear force are
the different forms of the same force. Their combination is called the electro
weak force. The physicists argue that two other forces in nature called
gravitational force and nuclear force will be brought under the same law in the
future.

Physics is unveiling the mystery of nature one after another. Similarly we can
say that an object consists of molecules, later on we see that the molecules
consist of atoms of elements. Despite the atoms being charge neutral, there is a
positive charged nucleus at the center and surrounding it, electrons are revolving.
Though an electron is an elementary particle, it is seen that the nucleus consists
of protons and neutrons. It is seen that neutrons and protons also consist of
elementary particles called quarks. At present the research topic is whether
electrons and quarks are made of strings.

1.4.2 To Know the Laws of Nature

From time immemorial we know that if something is released from above, it falls
downward and seeing this we can guess that the earth attracts everything towards
its center. If physics stops after pronouncing only the existence of gravitation,
this is not enough at all. The knowledge will not be appropriate until we precisely
know the force by which an object of a definite mass attracts another object of
another definite mass and how the force varies with the distance between them.
Newton explained this law of nature properly with the help of the law of
gravitation. The laws of nature can be used in many other places. So, the motion
of a falling body is explained with the help of gravitation, similarly the rotation
of the earth round the sun can also be explained. To know the laws of nature
properly the scientists analysed them with argumentative discussions, while also
conducting experiments in the laboratory. Behind the wonderful success of
12 Physics

physics, both theoretical and experimental research have been conducted. The
main objectives of physics is to find out the laws of nature by carrying out
research in these two different fields.

1.4.3 Development of Technology Using the Laws of Nature

From the theory of relativity Einstein deduced the law E = mc? and showed that
mass can be converted into energy. In 1938, by breaking a nucleus Otto Hann
and Fritz Strassmann showed that the amount of mass reduced, is converted to
energy.

Using this formula the nuclear bomb was made and dropped on Hiroshima and
Nagasaki in the Second World War and millions of people were killed within a
second. Not only deadly weapons can be made but also it is possible to use for
the good of mankind. Using this formula, nuclear power plants are made and
also in Rooppur of our country a nuclear power planty is being made.

Solid state physics is a branch of physics where semiconductors are studied.
Mixing some special elements with semiconductors, transistors are made. With
the help of this technology great development of electronics has occurred and
this has made a major contribution to the present civilization.

In this way we can show that physics has a small or large contribution in every
field of technology. Contributions of physics only in medical science are discussed in
the last chapter of this book.

Group Work

[ Prepare a poster on the development of physics.

@) Do Youself

Consider a particular distance as a particular time on a straight line, put the
important works that different scientists have done from the ancient period to
the present time on the straight line and show that there is a dark period in the
history of human civilization. Search out anyone reason, why there is a dark
period?

2025
2025

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 13

1.5 Physical Quantities and Their Measurements

We all know that water becomes ice when it is cooled; it becomes vapor when it
is heated. Peoples have been observing it from the very ancient times. This
knowledge alone cannot be science completely, unless we can say at what
condition and at what temperature water becomes ice after freezing or raising
the temperature at what condition and at what temperature does it start to boil
and becomes vapors. This means, in order to be science, everything has to be
measured. The most important point of science is to be able to explain
everything accurately after measuring them.

Table 1.01: Seven physical quantities in SI unit

Quantity Unit Symbol

Length meter m

Mass kilogram kg
Time second s
Electric current ampere A
Temperature kelvin K

Amount of substance mole mol
Luminous intensity candela cd

In this universe anything we can measure is called a quantity. In this physical
world there are innumerable quantities which can be measured. For example, we
can name, length, breadth, volume, weight, temperature, colour, rigidity,
position, velocity, internal material, electrical conductivity, non-conductivity,
elasticity, heat conductivity, non-conductivity, density, specific heat, pressure,
melting point, etc, and we cannot finish this list. In brief, in the physical world
the quantities are endless. You may think that to measure these infinite number
of quantities, we have to prepare the definitions and units for these infinite
number of quantities! Actually that is not true, you will be surprised hearing that
(and definitely be happy) if we can fix seven units of seven quantities, we will
be able to calculate everything using these seven units. These seven quantities
are called fundamental quantities. When we express other quantity using these

fundamental quantities that is called a derived quantity. The fundamental
quantities are length, mass, time, electric current, temperature, amount of
14 Physics

substance and luminous intensity. These internationally recognized seven units
of seven fundamental quantities are called SI units, (SI came from the France
language term ‘System International d’Units) and these are shown in Table
1.01. Table 1.02 shows some very big to very small quantities of distance, mass
and time.

Table 1.02: Very big to very small quantities of distance, mass and time

Distance m Mass kg Time Ss
Nearest galaxy | 6x 101%) |Our galaxy} 2 x 1041 Be bang 4x10”
Time si

Nearest star | 4x 10°6|| The Sun | 2x 102° |pianosaur-vanished|2 X 10
Radius of solar system] 6 x 1012) | The Earth | 6 x 1074 Time since Birth 8 x 10%
Radius of Earth | 6x 10° Ship 7x10’ || Singleday |9 x 10+

Height of Everest | 9 x 10° | | Elephant 5 x 108 Human it 1
Length of virus |1x10-® | Man 6x10 | Life time of |) 196
Radius of hydrogen 5x 10-11 Dust 7x 107-7 Vibration of 2x10

atom Green light
: -15 -31 | Vibration of 1
Radius of proton |1x 10 Electron 9x10 MeV gamma |4x 1 0-2
. ight
1.5.1 Units of Measurement

Among these units second, meter and candela are defined before by some
constants.

From May 2019 kilogram, kelvin, mole and ampere are also defined by some
constant of Physics. Now it is possible to measure all units very accurately using
these constant in any laboratory in the world.

Magnitude of fundamental constants those are essential to measure these seven
units are specified forever. The magnitude of seven constants are shown in the
Table 1.03

Constant Magnitude
Velocity of light (c) 2,99,792,458 meter/second
Plank’s constant (h) 6.62607015 x 10° joule second
Charge of electron (e) 1.602176634 x 10°? coulomb

2025
2025

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 15

Vibration frequency of C,'3 (Av,,)) 9,192,631,770 hertz

Boltzmann constant (k,) 1.380649 x 10-2 joule/kelvin
Avogadro constant (N,) 6.02214076 x 10 particles/mole
Luminous Intensity (Kop) | 683 lumens/watt

New definition of these units:

Second (s): The time required to complete 9,192,631,770 vibrations by
Cesium-133 (C,'*) atom is called one second.

Meter (m): In vacuum the distance travelled by light in 1/299,792,458 second
called one meter.

Kilogram (kg): The mass which is obtained by dividing Plank’s constant by
6.6260701510 m/s is called one kilogram.

Ampere (A): Flow of 1/1.602176634x10°? numbers of charge equivalent to
charge of electron in one second is called one ampere.

Mole (Mol): Amount of substance that contains 6.02214076x10” particles
(Avogadro’s number) is called one mole.

Kelvin (K): Amount of change of temperature with the change of
1.380649 103 joule heat is called one kelvin.

Candela (cd): One candela is defined as the amount of 1/683 watt luminous
intensity which is emitted by a source of light vibrating 540x10” cycle per
second into one Steradian solid angle.

Table 1.04: New Sl unit

You should have a practical idea about how
much is meant by one meter, what amount of
mass is one kilogram, what time is one
second, how much hot is one kelvin
temperature, what amount of electric current
is one ampere, what is meant by one mole
substance or what amount of light is one
candela! Now let us try to give you that idea
idea. Not only do you have to know it, but
also you have to feel it. In general it can be

16 Physics

said that:

e The distance from the feet to the stomach of a person of normal height is
nearly one meter.

e The water contained in one liter bottle or the water kept in four glasses have
a mass of nearly one kg.

e The time required to say three words ‘one thousand one’ is approximately
one second.

e If three mobile phones are charging at the same time, one ampere electric
current is used. (a mobile is charged at nearly 5 V. So, current consumption
will be Swatt. If lights, fans, refrigerators of a residence run at 220 V and one
ampere current is used, the power consumption will be 220 watt!)

e Ifwe can feel the fever of anyone by hand, it can be said that his temperature
has increased by one Kelvin.

e Itis difficult to understand a mole, we can say a a large spoon filled with water
contains one mole of water molecules. In one cup water, there are ten moles.

e The light coming from a single candle can be said one candela.

You see that none of them are perfect measurements, but easy to realize. If you
are habituated with this measurement, when in future you will calculate
anything, then you will have a sense of proportion about it.

1.5.2 Prefix

To study science or physics we have to measure different things. Sometimes we
need to measure the length of a galaxy (6x10* m), or sometimes we have to
measure the radius of the nucleus (1x10" m). To measure this huge difference
in the distance it is not wise to use the same type of numbers, So internationally
some SI prefixes have been made. Due to this multiplier we will be able to
express a large or small number by a small prefix. These prefixes are shown in
Table 1.05. In our daily life we always use these prefixes. To express distance
we say | kilometer instead of 1000 meter. We say 10 milliliter instead of one

hundredth of a liter to express volume of water.

2025
Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 17

Table 1.05: The multiples and sub-multiples used in the SI unit

deca da 10" deci d 107
hecto h 10? centi c 107
kilo k 10° milli m 10°
mega M 10° micro H 10°
giga G 10° nano n 10°
tera T 10” pico p 10
peta P 10"° femto f 10”
exa E 108 atto a 10%

1.5.3 Dimension

We already know that though there is an infinite number of quantities around
us, we can measure them with the help of seven units only. We have to know, in
which units a quantity can be expressed. Often we also need to know how this
quantity is formed with which fundamental quantities (length L, time 7, mass M
etc.). The power of different fundamental quantities in a quantity is called its
dimension. For example, we will see next that force is the product of mass and
acceleration. Again, acceleration is the rate of change of velocity with time. And
velocity is the rate of change of position with time.

Therefore,

distance

=+= 17-1
T

dimensions of velocity: =

distance L -
dimensions of acceleration: roan —=LT?
time T2

In this book, when we will speak about a new quantity, we will try to mention
the dimension of it at the same time. You will see that, this always will help you
to understand the quantity, in a different way. To indicate the dimensions of a
quantity in this book, it will be shown within third brackets. For example, force
F is expressed as [F]= MLT?.

Forma-3, Physics, Class 9-10
18 Physics
1.5.4 Scientific symbols and notations

The following methods are followed to write the symbol of units:

1. To express the value of a quantity, first we write a number, leave a
space after it and then write the symbol of the unit. For example, 2.21
kg, 7.3 X 10? m? or 22 K. The percentage (%) sign also follows the same rule.

However no space is left after a number to write degrees (°) minutes (‘) and seconds (’’).

2. Derived unit produced by multiplication is written using a space between
two units, e.g. 2.35 Nm

3. Derived unit produced by division is expressed as negative power or slash
(e.g. ms~+ or m/s)

4. No punctuation mark or period is used with the symbols, as they are
mathematical expressions but not the abbreviated form of anything.

5. The symbol of unit is written in straight font, for example, m for metre, s
for second etc. But the symbol of quantities are written in italic or curved
font, for example, m for mass, v for velocity etc.

6. The symbols of units are written in small letters, for example, cm, s, mol etc.
But capital letters are used for those units which are taken from the name of scientists
(N for Newton). If there are many letters in the unit then the first letter will be
capital only (the unit from the name of Pascal is Pa).

7. The prefix (k, G, M) of unit will be attached with the unit (m, W, Hz) with
no space. For example, km, GW, MHz.

8. Prefixes more than kilo (10) will be in capital letters (M, G, T).

9. The symbols of units will never be in plural from (e.g. not 25 kgs, always 25 kg).

10. We have to try to write any number or compound unit in a single line. A line
break can be given between a number and a unit if it is really necessary.

2025
2025

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 19

1.6 Measuring Instruments

Once it was very difficult to measure different quantities of physics accurately.
The job has become much easier due to electronics based instruments. For the
physics that we will try to learn in this book, knowing how to measure distance,
mass, time, temperature, electric current and voltage will be enough. Let us
discuss what type of instruments we will use to measure these:

1.6.1 Scale or Ruler

A Meter scale is used to measure small lengths and definitely you may have seen
it. Since this is 100 cm or 1 m long, it is called a meter scale. Since in many places
inch-foot is familiar still now (USA is an example!), inch is marked very often
on the other side of a meter scale. One inch equals 2.54 cm.

We can measure up to the smallest division on a scale. A meter scale is generally
divided up to millimeter, so using a meter scale we can measure the length of
anything up to millimeter. Therefore, if we say the length of anything is 0.364 m,
this means the length of this is 36 centimeter and 4 millimeter. Using a meter
scale it is not possible to measure lengths smaller than this - that is, generally we
can never say the length of a body is 0.3643 m. But from time to time, for
microscopic purposes we have to measure the smallest length of objects of this
type, which can be performed by using an interesting scale called vernier scale.

Slide calipersor vernier calipers

Let us consider that the length of an object comes in between
4 and 5 millimeter marking i.e. the length of the object is greater than 4 mm and

less than 5 mm. We can use the veriner scale to find how much fraction is greater
than 4mm. This scale is attached to the main scale and can be moved forward
and backward (Figure 1.05). In the example shown in the figure the length of 9
min of main scale is divided into 10 divisions on the vernier scale. Therefore every

or . 9 . an: 1
division of the vernier scale equals jp mm, ie. less than a millimeter by 10

millimeter. If the initial mark of the vernier scale coincides with any mark of the
millimeter scale, then the next mark of the vernier scale will keep a separation of

77 mm from the actual millimeter mark, and the next will keep a separation of =

mm, third one will keep a separation of 7m mm and so on.
20 Physics

Therefore no mark of the vernier scale will coincide with the millimeter mark of
the main scale, finally the 10% mark will coincide again with the ninth millimeter
mark of the main scale.

Vernier scale

™
ie at
Tt TT

0 1 cm 2

Main scale Pal

Figure 1.05: Main scale and movable vernier scale

If we keep the vernier scale in such a way that it does not start from a millimeter

mark rather it starts with a slight (e. g— mm) displacement (Figure 1.06) then the

number of = mm displacements by which it has moved will be the mark

of the vernier scale coinciding with the millimeter mark of the main scale! Therefore,
it is very easy to measure a length using a vernier scale. First of all, we have to know
the difference between one division of vernier scale and one division of the main
scale- this is called the vernier constant-- in brief VC. This can be calculated if we
divide the length of the smallest division (1 mm) of the main scale by the total
number of divisions of the vernier scale (in the figure 1.05 and 1.06 it is 10). In
our example, the value of this :
1mm
VC= “10 = 0.1 mm = 0.0001 m

To measure a length, we have to look at the vernier scale after measuring up to
the last millimeter mark. The mark of the vernier scale that coincides exactly
with any millimeter mark of the main scale is then found, and then that number
is multiplied by the vernier constant. We will get the actual length by adding this
amount with the length measured by the main scale. According to our procedure
the length shown on the last scale of Figure 1.06 is 1.03 cm or 0.013 m. This
instrument consisting of a'main scale' and a'vernier scale’ is called a Slide
calipers or vernier calipers

2025
2025

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 21

mop tty ane
0 1 cm 2
mop tty ae
0 1 scm 2
mop tty mT
0 i cm 2

Figure 1.06: Vernier scale displaced by one, two and three divisions

Instead of the vernier scale we can use a special type of scale called a screw
gauge to measure lengths. In a screw gauge when the screw (Figure 1.07)
rotates, the scale moves forwards or backwards, the threads of the screw are kept
very fine. After a complete rotation of the screw, the screw with the attached
scale may advanced by1mm. This displacement of the screw is called the pitch of
the screw. The circular part of the instrument, by the rotation of which the screw
moves forwards or backwards is divided into 100 equal parts. For the rotation of
only one division of the circular scale, the screw advances by a of the pitch.

Therefore, with this scale up to a mm = 0.01 mm of length measurement is

possible. This is called the least count of the screw gauge.

Figure 1.07: A slide calipers with vernier scale and a screw gauge

Now-a-days instead of the vernier scale, attached dials or digital slide calipers
are available by which lengths can be measured accurately.
22 Physics

1.6.2 Balance

Mass cannot be measured directly, so mass is
generally determined by measuring the weight.
When we say the weight of an object is 1 gm or 1
kg, then actually we mean that the mass of the
object is 1 gm or 1 kg. In earlier times to measure
the mass of an object, a balance was used, there
the mass of the object was compared with the
definite mass of a known weight. Now-a-days the
use of electronic balance (figure 1.08) has
increased a lot. If we keep the body on the Figure 1.08: Digital weigh
balance then the sensors of the balance can machine

determine the weight very precisely.

1.6.3 Stop Watch

Stop watches are used to measure time interval
(figure 1.09). Once accurate stop watches were
very precious things. Now-a-days very accurate
stop watches are available in the mobile phone
at low prices due to the advancement of
electronics. In a stop watch, time measurement
is started at any instant of time, and by stopping
the measurement of time after a definite
interval, the elapsed time can be determined. An
interesting matter is that the stop watch can
measure the time very accurately, but we can never start or stop it with our
hands with the same accuracy.

@) Do Yourself

(7 here is less probability for all of you to possess slide calipers \
but if you want, you can make a slide calipers to carry on your work. Make a
photocopy of figure 1.10, Cut the part of the main scale and the vernier scale
and then put it together after folding as shown in the figure following the
steps (1, 2, 3,...... accordingly). Now you can measure any length accurately.
The slide calipers is also graduated in inch. So to get the length in centimeter
we need to multiply it with 2.54. yy,

Figure 1.09: Stop watch

2025
ise)
N

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements

@) Folding along this line,
take left part behind.

¥ A,
3 .

Pox

(1) Folding along this line,
/ take upper part behind.
: eT i) eas @) Folding along this line,
i Inch Pi take lower part behind.
> *”
— 1
@® Folding along this line,
take the entire folded J
left part behind. y /

-------------].«—(6) Folding along this line,
keep upper part vertically.

+—(7) Now keep the main scale
here.

5) Folding along this A :
in take left part ad \ | —(@) Folding upper part first

? then lower part, cover
behind. . ‘ the main scale.
Vernier scale. e J

Figure 1.10 : Making slide calipers with paper

S707
24

Q) Investigation 1.01

/Objective: To find out the volume of a match box or any other object by
measuring its length, breadth and height using a slide calipers. If you have
no slide calipers with you, you can make a slide calipers as shown in figure
1.10.

1. To measure the length of an object by slide calipers we need to place it
between the jaws of the slide calipers. The jaws need to touch the object
from both the sides.

2. Now observe carefully the mark of the main scale that the zero marking
of vernier scale has just crossed. Mark of the main scale that the. That will
be the main scale reading M. Notice that, the mark which is very close to the
main scale, is not the reading of main scale, the mark that has just crossed
the main scale fully is the main scale reading.

3. At this position find out which mark of the vernier scale coincides with
any mark of the main scale, this is the vernier coincidence.

Measure the length of the object several times and put it in the table.

In the same way measure the breadth and height of the object.
Observation:

Determination of vernier constant:

Value of one smallest division of main scale, S = .............6.

Total number of divisions of vernier scale, n= ...............

Vernier constant, VC = s/n= ..........0006

Table 1.06: Table of finding length, breadth and height of a rectangular object:

Object’s No. of |Mainscale| Vernier | Vernier | Reading= | Average
observations |reading M |coincidence|constant |M + V x VC reading
Vv vc
Length
L
Width
WwW
Height
(4

Physics

2025
Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 25

1.7 Error and Accuracy

Error is a negative word and if the word "error in measurement" used, we think
that the person who is doing the measurement is not performing his duties
properly and an error has occurred! But this is not the case. Sometimes error
may occur due to the person who is doing the measurement for his negligence,
but we have to know that the instrument with which we measure is not error free.
Therefore, there is a limit of how much accurately we can measure, i.e. it is very
natural to have errors in measurement. But there is a need to mearuse to what
extent a measusement is accurate . The reliability of a result will be increased if
we can inform how accurate the result is when we publish the result of an
experiment. You can report the measurement of the accuracy of your
experiment if you know some conventional rules for finding the accuracy of an
experiment.

Suppose, you are measuring the length of an object by a scale. How accurately
you will measure the length of the object depends on how finely your scale is
graduated. If the scale is graduated in 1 cm intervals then you will express your
result for length in some definite number of cm. But the real length of the object
is not exactly equal to this mentioned number of cm but perhaps very close to it,
so there is a possibility of uncertainty in your measured length. That is why, we
add that amount of uncertainty with the measured result. Therefore, if we see the
length is close to 4 cm, we will say the length of the object is:

(4.0 + 0.5)cm
Therefore the length of the object may have any value within 3.5 cm to 4.5 cm.

Example

Question: What is the length of the object ——e

shown in Figure 1.11? | | | | | | | | | |
Answer: he length of the object is 740.5 |

mm. That is, the length of the object willbe |Q cm 1
of any value from 6.5 mm to 7.5 mm.

Figure 1.11 : The length of the object
beside the scale is nearly 7 mm

Forma-4, Physics, Class 9-10
26 Physics

Now we can discuss how accuracy can be measured. The measurement of
accuracy is the absolute error. Observing the name we understand that this is the
difference of the measured value with respect to the actual value. You can
definitely understand that when we measure anything we don’t know the actual
value. So, instead of absolute error we use the most probable error. Therefore in
our previous example the absolute error is

|+0.5 mm] = 0.5 mm

We can consider the relative error after the absolute error. Let us consider that an
error of 0.5 mm has occurred while measuning length. If the length of the object
is 1 mm then this error is very serious, but if the length is 1 m then the
measurement is accurate enough. The concept of relative error has been
introduced to give a better understanding.

Therefore, Absolute error

Relative error = ————_
Measured value

So in our previous example:
Relative error: 0.5 mm/ 7 mm = 0.071
In percentage this is: 0.071 x 100 = 7.1 %

Question: Suppose you have got 10 cm by measuring the length of a square
shaped book. Suppose the relative error in the measurement is 10%. What is the
relative error in its area?

Answer:

Measured area of the object =10 cmx10 cm=100 cm?

Since the relative error of the object is 10%, hence if its length is measured, the
minimum length will be 9 cm and maximum length will be 11 cm.

“ The minimum area = 9cm x 9cm = 81 cm”
and the maximum area = 11cm X 11 cm = 121 cm”
Therefore the absolute error:

100 cm? — 81 cm?| = 19 cm’m?
or, |121 cm? — 100 cm?| = 21 c¢

Since the values are not equal, we consider the larger one i.e. the absolute

etror is 21 cm?

2025
2025

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 27

Therefore, the relative error = 21cm? /100 cm* = 0.21
In percentage, 0.21 x 100 = 21%

If the error in the measurement of the length is 10%, then in the case of area
it will be approximately double. Similarly you can show that in the case
of volume measurements the error will be three times!

Question: You have measured a box by a ruler which is graduated only in cm.
You have got the length, breadth and height of the box as 10 cm, 5 cm and 4 cm
respectively. What is the percentage of error in your measurements?

Answer: Since your ruler is graduated only in cm, so your error is + 0.5 cm.
Therefore the error in your measurements:

Length: 10 + 0.5 cm
Breadth: 5 +0.5cm
Height: 4+ 0.5 cm
Your measured volume: 10 cm x 5 cm x 4.cm = 200 cm?
Probable smallest volume:
(10 — 0.5) cm x (5 — 0.5) cm x (4 — 0.5) cm = 149.625 cm?
Probable largest volume:
(10 + 0.5) cm x (5 + 0.5) cm x (4 + 0.5) cm = 259.875 cm
Therefore the volume,
149.625 cm? < V < 259.875 cm?

Absolute error:
From 149.625 cm? to 200 cm? is 200 cm? — 149.625 cm? = 50.375 cm?
From 200 cm? to 259.875 cm? is 259.875 cm? — 200 cm? = 59.875 cm?

Considering the largest value we have the absolute error 59.875 cm?

Relative error: 59.875 cm?/200 cm? x 100 = 29.9375% = 30%
28

Physics

(?) Exercise

General questions

1.
2.

Write a report on why we may study physics.
Wonderful advancement took place in the twentieth century- support the
statement with examples.

. a) What do you mean by a quantity?

b) Write down the difference between fundamental and derived quantities.

. a) In SI unit which quantities are considered as fundamental quantities?

b) Write down the names of the units of these quantities.

. What do you mean by dimension?
. Arguments, experimentation and observation- among these three methods

which one would you prefer as the most important for science research.

. Among the seven SI units, one is little bit different from the others. Can you

say which one and why?

. If you and everything around you suddenly becomes half in size, will you

be able to understand the changes?
. Will you be able to measure the radius of the earth?

© Mathematical questions

. Express the numbers given below using the prefixes in Table 1.05
(a) 10" Flops (b)10’ bytes (c)10-°gm (d)10°°m

2. In one year how many seconds are there? (for fun express in terms of 77 )

3. How many meters are there in a light year?

{
. ieee | i T
4. When measuring the lengt of Mp TTT TT]T
a bar with a vernier scale, it looks
as in figure 1.12. What is the 10 1_cm 2
length of the bar? Figure 1.12: Reading of a vernier scale

5. The dimension of energy is ML’T”, in SI units what is its unit?

2025
2025

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 29

\o> , ;
Multiple choice questions
P 1

Put tick (V ) mark on the correct answer

1. Who has given the quantum theory at first?
a) Planck b) Einstein
c) Rutherford d) Heisenberg

2. The name ‘boson’ came from?
a) Jagadish Chandra Basu
b) Subhash Chandra Basu
c) Satyendranath Basu
d) Sharat Chandra Basu

3. Which of below is not a fundamental quantity ?
a) Mass b) Heat
c) Electric current d) Quantity of substance

4. When a rod is placed between the jaws of a slide calipers, the main scale
reading is found to be 4 cm, the vernier super-imposition is 7 and if the vernier
constant is 0.1 mm, what is the length of the rod?

a) 4.07 cm b) 4.7cm
c) 4.07 mm d) 4.7 mm

From the figure below answer questions 5 and 6.

5. What is the volume of figure (b)

1.3 43
a) 5ar b) gar

3
c) -ar3 d) ar?
4

6. The ratio of the volume of figure
(a) and figure (b):

a) 1: 0.673 b) 1: 0.0673 s

c) 1: 0.763 d) 1: 0.637

(b)
Figure 1.13: A block and a cylinder
30 Physics

Creative questions

1. Rashed, with his newly purchased scale, measured the length of his pencil and

the length came to 11.73 cm. His friend Sujon said that this measurement may

not be correct. Rashed said that he obtained the same result measuring by the

scale several times. When they went to the teacher, he instructed them to use a

vernier scale of constant 0.005 cm. Rashed measured the correct length by the

vernier scale.

(a) What is the vernier constant ?

(b) Why are units required to express the amount of a quantity?

(c) Find a division of vernier scale is equal to what number of divisions of
main scale.

(d) The frist measurement of length measured by Rashed was irrelevant to
accurate measurement, explain with logic.

2. Mr Rashid, a science teacher, has given a ruler and a box to the students in his
physics class and told them to determine the volume of the box. The students
observed that the ruler could be used to measure upto cm only. They determined
the length, breadth, and height of the box as 20 cm, 15 cm and 10 cm
respectively.

(a) What is its dimension?

(b) Why weight and mass are not the same type of quantity?

(c) Determine the percentage of relative error in the measurement of volume
of the box?

(d) This ruler is appropriate for measuring the area of the book but not
suitable for measuring the area of the house- analyze the statement.

2025
