Chapter Eight

Human Settlements

A settlement is a place where people live. It can be as small as an isolated farm or a
hamlet. The location and growth of a settlement depends on its site and situation.
The site is the actual place where people decide to locate their settlement. The
growth of that settlement then depends on its situation in relation to natural resources
and other setilements.

Settlement varies with the physical features of the region. House types also varies
from rural to urban areas. Human settlement is increasing with the growth of

population im the world. Unplanned urbanization is the reason behind extensive
environment pollution.

| Rawal settlement
At the end of this chapter, we will be able ta—

® explain the factors of location settlement;

e discuss the pattem of urban and rural settlement;

e discuss the pattern and explain type of rural settlement;

® know about urbanization and types of cities;

« know the impact of urbanization;

e know problems due to unplanned urbanization;

® classify the type and pattern of settlement of our area,

« know the surrounding physical environment and take care of it.

2025
2025

Human Settlements 127

Factors of settlement

The sites of settlement determined by the following physical factors.

1. Topography: Topography plays a major role in the formation of a settlement. It is
easy to cultivate in plain land, but in hilly area, it is difficult. So, in a hilly area, for
the sake of easy communication, the settlements are formed near the cultivable
land. In Bangladesh, density of settlements in Chittagong hill tracts is less than
that in plain land.

2, Availability of water: Human beings cannot live without pure water. Therfore,
they establish their settlements around water resources. In the desert and
sub-desert regions, human beings build their settlements in a cluster around well or
natural waterfall. This type of settlement which has grown on the basis of
avauability of water is known as Humid Region Settlement.

3. Soil : Human settlements are established depending on the fertility of soil.
Agglomerated settlements grow up in fertile land while scattered settlements grow
up in infertile land.

4, Defense: In order to defend themselves human beings used to live nn agglomerated
settlement in ancient time. In that time, they had to protect themselves from
external enemies and ferocious animals with bare hands.

5. Grazing: Scattered settlements are seen in grazing areas, Grazing needs vast area,
Therfore, in some regions, people build Dispersed Settlements for their own
advantage.

6. Transport: In ancient time, people built settlements where the physical features
were convenient for transport and communication. For example, Agglomerated
Settlement grew up on plain land and by the river sides for the availability of land
and water transports. The Evyptian civilization and the Indus civilization developed
beside the Nile river and the Indus river respectively due to convenience in
communication.
128 Geography and Enviranment

Types of settlement

There are two types of settlement-rural settlement and urban settlement

Rural settlement : People whose
livelihood is from primary activities
(farming, fishing ete.) living in rural

Rural settlements are classified into
scattered and nucleated linear depending
on topography of the land. Using the
site and situation factors of the location

Te

j
lie

Fig. 8.1 : Rural settlement

of settlement, these rural settlements are
at a comer of cropland higher than the
located surrounding area so that the
homestead is above flood level during normal flooding, Rural settlements have
different types of characteristics on the basis of its design and construction
material (fig. 8.1). Construction materials are usually tin, bamboo and bamboo
mats etc. These dwellings are noi strong. It is easily destroyed by a _ big
storm or flood. In Bangladesh the rural settlements have a special design. There is
an open space inside the dwelling for drying the rice crop. Bedroom. crop storage area
and kitchen are all located around the open space, One open space is shared by two or
three families. In the mural areas roads are few. Apart from agricultural activities some
tural areas one specialized in producing hand woven clothes, pottery items and dairy

product and these places are named according to the profession of the dwellers.

Urban settlement : The settlements where most of the people are engaged in
secondary and tertiary economic activities (industrial productions, transportation,
purchase and sell, administration, educational activities etc.) are known as urban

settlements. In external consideration, there are numerous roads ancl streets; and im

areas are the inhabitants of rural settlement.

2025
Human Settlements 129

same areas, there are skyscrapers (fig.
8.2). Besides, there are different types
of hospitals, stadiums, movie theatres,
niultistoried markets, parks ete.
Tifferent activities are cared on
different parts of large cities. Urban
settlements are characterized by
design, sttucture, —s construction
material and well defined streets and
urban facilities like electricity, water.

Fig. 6.2 : Urban settlement

Bas, sewerage etc.

Task : Find out the differences between the urban and rural settlement.

Patterns of rural settlements

On the basis of location rural settlement can be classified
into three groups ;

1. Nucleated settlement : Several dwellings grouped
together for defensive purposes or for social and
economic reasons are known as nucleated settlement.
This type of settlement is found in the Hilly areas
of Bangladesh in the north eastern and south eastern
part. The dwellings of this type of settlement are close
to one another, Physical features, soil fertility and source

of water supply are some of the causes of nucleated Fig. 3.3 : Nucleated settlement
settlement (fig. 8.3).

1, Scattered settlement : Scattered settlement occurs in an area of adverse
physical condition where natural resources are insufficient to support more than
a few people. Scattered settlement is an isolated. individual dwelling, or a group
of dwellings forming a hamlet/small village and separated from the next group by

Forma-17, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
130 Geography and Environment

two or three kilometres (fig . 8.4).

3. Linear settlement : A linear settlement is a small to medium sized setilement
that is formed around a transport route, such as a road, river and canal (fig. 8.5).

Fig. 8.4: Dispersed settlement

Fig. 8.3 ; Linear settlement

Task : Write down the characteristics of rural settlement in a chart below (group wise task).

Nucleated settlement Dispersed settlement Linear settlement
* . *
J . *
Urbanization

The term ‘urbanization* means the increase in the proportion of the world’s
population who live in cities. The process of urbanization starts after certain
conditions are met such as surplus production of food, specialization of labour etc.
In 5000 BC, most people in the world lived by hunting and gathering their food.
farming. Fanning Over the next 3000 years a major transformation occurred due to
the development of allows people to setile in a particular area. The first civilization
started in Mesopotamia in 2500 BC in the fertile farmland between the Tigris and
Euphrates rivers. The Valley of Nile was also a region of early civilization. By
1200 BC major civilizations have also emerged along the banks of Indus river in
Mohenjodaro and Harappa in Pakistan, in China in the valleys of Yellow River and
in Greece. Roman cryilization spread ‘city idea’ throughout the Mediterranean and
mainland Europe. The fall of Roman Empire in the late 5th century led to the decline
of urban life.

2025

2025

Human Settlements 131

Then followed the dark ages from 500-1000 A.D. when urban life and traditions
all disappeared for over 500 years. In 715 A.D. Muslim army conquered most of
Spain, only the mountainous north remained independent, They established cities
in Cordova, Toledo and Seville, which became the centres of learning at that time.
The great urban growth started from 1000 A.D, During 1000-1400 A.D. urban
expansion took place in western and central Europe and also in central Russia with
a marked growth of population. By 1400 A.D. the western and central Europe was
filled with towns and villages. The impact of technology during the period 1600-
1800 A.D. gave great momentum to commerce and exploration. The people of
northern Europe began colonization of North America, Asia and Africa. New cities
like New York, Philadelphia, Boston, Montreal, Goa, Kolkata, Singapore, Jakarta
grew up. During the industrial revolution for extracting coal and iron ore new mining
towns grew up as those raw materials were used in the industries. Manufacturing
towns developed on the basis of secondary activities for selling the manufactured
goods within the country or exporting them outside the country. Tertiary activity
oriented market towns or ports developed. According to the opinion of the experts,
in near future majority of the population of the world will live in the cities.
Urbanization is related with two types of process. (1) Rural Urban migration of
people resulting in higher percentage of population living in the city. (2) Urban
culture is spread easily through transport and communication routes as a result the

culture gap of rural and urban people is greatly reduced.

Task : What is urbanization? Discuss in group and write down the points in a
copy or chart paper.

Classification of cities

Geographers have classified the cities in different ways, cities differ in size,
structure, population characteristics and functions. Even though there are various
types of categories but the classification on the basis of functions is more important.

Types of cities on the basis of function are as follows:

1. Cities based on military activities : Army and navy establishments like garrisons
or foris are located at strategic places of a country. Gradually cities grow up around
132 Geography and Environment

these locations, Agra in India, Gibraltar in Spain, Edinburgh in Scotland ete. are the
examples of this type of cities.

2. Administrative cities : Centre of administrative and political activities becomes a
city. For administrative purpose a central city is identified as the capital and then
urban settlement expands in that city. Dhaka in Bangladesh. New Delhi in India,

Islamabad in Pakistan and Canberra in Australia are such cities.

3. Industrial cities : Industrial activitiy is an important factor in urbanization. For the
industrial use of coal. cities grew up in areas of coal mines and in this way many
coal cities grew up around the world. New Castle in UK, Raniganj in India,
Pennsylvania in USA are mining cities.

4, Trading cities : Small service centres expended and became urban settlements.
Since the dawn of civilization exchange of goods in a place starts a trading centre or a
market. The local market grew up at the junction of roads. This factor is still very
important in the growth of towns and cities. In ancient times many trading cities grew
up on continental land routes as Damascus in Syria, Alexandria m Egypt and the city of
Fez in Morocco. Dhaka grew up along the banks of the Buriganga river and Chattogram
along the Karnaphuli river.

5. Cities based on cultural activities : A city can develop for religious reasons.
Birthplace of a renowned personality, his place of activity or his memorial can
lead to the growth of cities. Mecca, Jerusalem, Goya are religious cities. Some world
famous university or research institution can also play an important role in the
growth of cities. Oxford and Cambridge in England, Nalanda in India are the
university towns. Other cultural activities like fine arts and film industry can also be

ihe factor of a new city such as Paris for fine arts. Hollywood in USA and Mumbai
in India for film industry,

6. Health resort and recreation centre : To get recreation from the routine activities
of life. people spend time outside their home in seaside or hill resort. These types of
resorts are Cox's Bazar in Bangladesh, Puri in India and Honolulu in USA where
sea-beach is a great attraction for everybody.

Task : Name five cities of Bangladesh and their origins.

2025
2025

Human Settlements 133

Impact of urbanization

Processes that mfluence the urbanization and the urban structure are discussed below :

1. Size and density of the population : Usually cities are densely populated. In
Bangladesh any settlement which has a minimum population of 5000 persons
and density of 1500 persons per square kilometres is called a City. Fertility and

mortally rates are less in the unban areas than therural areas. But due to migration
urban population 1s gradually increasing.

2, House types: Multistoried buildings made of fricks, wood, iron, cement are built
in urban areas as a large population live in a small area. Wide roads, parks, artificial
lakes increase the beauty of the cities. All modern amenities like electricity, water
supply and gas are available here.

3. Transport system : As there are well constructed in urban areas, people can move
from one place to another using various types of transport.Cheap and easy transport

is an added attraction of the cities.

4, Family size : Family is the oldest form of social institution. In urban areas
nucleated family is more common. Average family size in the city ranges between
4-6 persons. The city people with various types of occupation have little time for
recreation So they cannot spend much time with their family.

5. Behaviour pattern : Mobility is very high in urban life: As there is scope to
change one's occupation people easily change their professions from time to time.
Here the social status is determined by the earning capacity. People of rural areas are
conservative. They are more respectful towards traditional social values. In the rural

areas, social status is determined by birth right.

6. Economy : People of the urban areas are engaged in secondary and tertiary
economic activity. Urban profession is yery diversified. They are usually engaged in
non agricultural work like business, education, administration and service sectors.

7. Services : An urban area is provided with services like electricity, gas, water,
sewerage and roads.
134 Geography and Environment

8. Education and Health services : In the urban areas people, get highest benefit
from education and health service facilities.

9. Recreation : In urban areas people have recreation facilities to overcome their
tiredness from very active life, Cinema. theatre and stadiums have profound influence

on urban life of the urban people,

10. Rise of crimes : In urban areas stealing, cheating mugging and brawling are
regular incidents. These incidents are the negative impact of urban life.

IL. Political and Social organization : Civil society organizations of the urban
areas are very active. Different types of politcal activities and programmes are
directed from the cities. Other social organizations arrange cultural and traditional
folk festivals which add pleasure to the urban life.

Task : Write down the advantages and disadvantages related to urbanization that you have
observed.

Problems of unplanned urbanization

Unplanned urbanization in different countries of the world created vanous
types of environmental problems and Bangladesh is one of them. Bangladesh is not
an industrialized nation, but itis in the initial stages of urbanization, Urbanization
processes are growmg rapidly. But all urban centres are not growing equally. Growth
rate of large urban centres is high as industries, government administration and service

sectors are rapidly expanding there.

About 40 percent of the population of the world live In urban areas. Relatively size
of urban population in Bangladesh is small now but it is increasing gradually.
Unplanned urbanization is directly related to environmental problem, such as loss of
agricultural land, drinking water scarcity, drainage problem, waste management,
transport and traffic jam problem, housing problem, increase of slum, pollution of

water, alr, land and noise, scarcity of open space and absence of recreational facilities.

2025
2025

Human Settlements 135

In Bangladesh per capita agricultural land is only 0.05 acre.Urban areas usually grow
up in fertile agricultural land and gradually agricultural land is acquired for the
expansion of urban areas. According to the World Health Organization for an
urban area with 10 lakh population, 1,37,36,268 gallons of water is required per
day, Only Dhaka city needs 28.5 crore gallons of water everyday, Wasa can
supply only 18 crore gallon and about 3.5 crore gallon is wasted or misused, So,
the deficit is 15 crore gallon. In dry season water scarcity in the city is high.
According to the World Health Organization, a person requires 7 gallons of water
a day for his survival but in our country urban people get less than its average
daily.

Waste water and river water is collected at Chandighat and then refined and
distributed again. In this case, the use of Meghna and Jamuna river water is important.
Daily on an average 900 tons of waste is generated in Dhaka which is disposed in the
lowlands and open ateas. These wastes produce stink and bad smell in the

surrounding areas, and the seepage into the soil pollutes the underground water
lable. People from slum areas use this water for their living. Asa result they
suffer from skin disease, cholera, typhoid, malaria and other distases, In other
divisional cities such as Chittagong. Khulna, Rajshahi the situation is same.

The number of transport is increasing in-almost all the cities. Fumes combined with
harmful element like sulphur dioxide, nitrous oxide, nickel etc. are in the air. These

pollution cause asthma and various types of allergy.

In unplanned city there is a scarcity of housing, The poorest people and the migrants
from the rural areas live in the densely populated slums are the causes of
environmental pollution, Roads and lighways, educational institutions, health centres,
recreation centres, easily available fuel, trade centre and markets are essential part of
urbanization. Due to steady incarease of urban population it is difficult to provide all
these services. Due to this unplanned urbanization building a planned city is really
diffeult,

Task : Make a list of negative impact of unplanned urbanization

136 Geography and Environment

Exercise

Multiple choice questions

1. What type of settlement is there in Madhupur?
a. Clustered b. Dispersed
ce. Nucleated d. Linear

2. How does a human being begin to adapt himself/herself with the environment?
a. To make a settlement b. Make a family

ce. Choose occupation d. ‘Take education

Read the text below and answer the question number 3 and 4,

Sadia lives in such a place from where she can move to anywhere in Bangladesh. At
present, linear settlement has been developed there. As a result, there are wide roads,
electricity, pas, water and sewerage are available.

3. What is the natural features in Sadia’s area?
a. Hilly b. Plains
ec. River bank d. Forests
4. What type of advantages are there in Sadia's area?
i: Urban facilities
ii, Education and health facilities
ili. Working facilities
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iand il b.  fand iti

c. iiand iii d, i, di and iti

2025
Human Settlements 137

Creative questions

1. Badal and Shuvo both of them live in a city. But Shuvo’s city is an
administrative city. The town where Badal lives now was a village once. A few
years ago an EPZ has been established there and now it has beecome a town.

a, Name the civilization which spread the idea of city,
b. How does soil help to establish a settlement?
c, Explain the role of EPZ in the establishment of town in Badal’s area,

ad. Shuvo’s town is different in nature from Badal’s town-explain.

2. CH :

Settlaments

en

J}

O09

Fig.1 Fig. 2

a. What is rural settlement?
b. How does a settlement grow up? Explain.
ce, In figure number | explain the reasons of settlement growth,

d. In figure number 2. explain the process of settlement growth.

Fonna-18, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
