Chapter Ten
Mineral Resources: Metal-Nonmetal

Mineral stone of various colour.

We are using different kinds of materials and products everyday that are made
by tin, iron, copper, gold, porcelain. These may be elements, compounds or a
mixture of both. Many of them are obtained from mines. What is a mineral
resource? How do we get metals and nonmetals from the mines? Besides, how
we make various necessary products from these is the focus of this chapter.

Forma-3(), Chemistry Class-9-10
234 Chemistry

. explain mineral resources

. compare among rocks, minerals and ores

‘ find out the appropriate ways of metal extraction

, explain the cause of making alloys

. deseribe source of sulfur and reactions of formation of some of tts
important compounds, their chemical properties and analyze their

uses in houses, industries and agriculture

. analyze the importance of limitation, appropriate use and
recycling of minerals
. show sincerity in use of minerals and keenness in preserving

20235
2025

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 238

10.1 Mineral Resources

We obtain all our necessary metals, nonmetals, metalloids and their compounds
from earth, air or water. The part of air, water or earth from where we eet these
is called a mime. Those found in these mines are called minerals. Minerals may
be solid like iron or copper mineral. They may be liquid like petroleum or
mineral oil’s mineral. They may also be gaseous like natural eas. Our country
abounds in natural gas which is used for cooking, fuel of vehicles, power
generation or raw materials in various industries. Middle eastern countries have
petroleum minerals which they are exporting throughout the world and which
meets up the demand of petroleum products. South Africa has mines of gold and
diamond. Besides, different countries have different minerals which contribute
to the development of that country as well as the whole world. These solid, liquid
and gaseous minerals are called mineral resources.

Magnesium (thers
r 21% 7% Sodium
silicon
parte 3% Oxygen

46%

Aluminium
‘a0 Potassium
Iron :
5% Calsium 3%
4%

Fig 10.1; Ingredients of the Earth Crust.

10.1.2 Rocks

Different mineral substances nux up to make some hard particles which again
combine together into a substance which is called rock. Basing on the way of
their formation, rocks are of three kinds: (i) Igneous rocks, (11) Sedimentary
rocks and (11) Metamorphic rocks.
236 Chemistry

Igneous Rock

The roolten nux of different substances that pour out from the volcanoes is called
magma. When magma cools down and solidifies it is called igneous rock.
Granite 1s an example of this rock. Igneous rock is the source of many minerals.

Fig 10.2: Igneous rock, Sedimentary rock and Metamorphie rocks,

Sedimentary Rock

As an effect of weather and climate, rainfall, wind, fog storms etc. clay and sand
from the earth’s crust is washed or blown away which again gathers in some
places as sediment. Then different particles in that sediment organize themselves
in layers and transform into a rock which is known as sedimentary rock. An
example of this is sandy stone.

Metamorphic Rock

At various pressures and temperatures,
the igneous and sedimentary rocks
transform into a new land of rock
which is called a metamorphic rock.
Coal is this land of a rock.

Formation of Different Layers of
Sub-surface Rocks

Rocks are organized in different layers
underground. Gravitational force,
temperature, pressure and natural force Fig 10,03: Layers of Rocks.
etc. help form different layers of rocks ;
underground.

£023
2025

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 237

10.1.3 Minerals and Ores

Minerals: The substances available above and underneath the soil from which
we get necessary metals and nonmetals, to make various products, are known as
minerals. The places where these minerals are found are called mines.

Ores: The minerals from which metals and nonmetals can be extracted
profitably are called ores. For example, galena (PbS) is the ore of lead as from it,
the metal lead is profitably extracted. Aluminium cannot be profitably extracted
from bauxite and so bauxite is called the mineral of aluminium but not the ore of
aluminium. Therefore, we can say, all ores are minerals but not all minerals are
ores.

Sulfide of iron is called iron pyrites (FeS,). Iron can be extracted from pyrites.
Position of Minerals

Earlier, it was idealized that minerals are available only beneath the surface.
Now, this concept is no more correct. Some minerals are obtained from beneath
the surface but some are also available on the surface. Sulfur minerals are
available beneath the earth’s surface. White clay or keulin mineral is available
on the surface at Bijoypur of Netrokona. The sand of Cox’s bazaar sea beach
contains zircon, the mineral of zirconium and hematite, the iron mineral,
bauxite, the aluminium mineral! etc. are available on the surface of various
places. Halogen minerals are available in the sea water.

10.2 Metal Extraction

The process through which metals are obtained from the ores is called metal
extraction. Different metals have different properties. That is why there is no one
process of extracting all metals from their ores; there is difference in the process
of extracting different metals. Some non-reactive metals like gold, platinum etc.
are sometimes found in their pure state. However, less and more reactive metals
are usually found in their compound states like oxides, sulfides, nitrates,
carbonates etc. That is why, the compounds of reactive metals are extracted by
238 Chemistry

reduction or by electrolysis process. There are a number of steps of metal
extraction from their ores, which are: 1. Crushing the ores. 2. Condensation of
ores. 3. Conversion of condensed ore to oxides. 4. Conversion of metallic oxides
to free metals. 5. Purification of metals. However, the steps of metal extraction
is decided by the properties of the ores. All steps are not necessary for all ores.

1. Crushing the Ores:

Tf the stones of ore that are excavated from the mines are big, they need to be
crushed first. Firstly they are crushed in the Joe crusher to smaller pieces and
then they are turned into powder or smal lattices in the Ball crusher.

2. Condensation of Ores:

Usually the ores contain some substances apart
from the metal that is to be extracted from it. This
mixture of substances in the ore is called
impurities. The crushed powder of ores still
contains the impurities mixed with them. For
example, bauxite ore contains sand as impurity
when it is excavated from the mine. The process

that is employed to separate these impurities from
the intended metals is called condensation of ores. Fig 10.04; Joe Crusher,
Condensation is of various kinds like Hydrolytic

method, Magnetic separation, Froth Floatation, Chemical method ete.

Hydrolytic Method: This method is usually applied for oxide ores. The
particles of oxide are comparatively heavy while the impurities are light. In the
process the ore is poured on a slanted, chambered table and water is poured on
the ore. At this, the heavy ore becomes condensed and goes inside the chamber
while the impurities are washed away with water. This way, the ores are
condensed.

2025
2025

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 239

Froth Floatation Method: The sulfide ores are condensed in this method. The
ore is first taken inside a large tank and water is added. Later, oil is slowly added
to the mixture. When air is blown on the ore. the sulfide ore dissolves in the oil
and floats up as froth. The froth is collected while the impurities remain at the
bettom of the tank,

Experiment of Froth Floatation Method

Ingredients: sand, kerosene, spatula, liquid‘powder soap, watch glass, a large
test tube with cork. celcopyrite, galena or hematite powder

Process:

1, Mix equal amounts of sand with one =-_
spatula of washed ore. Take the mixture oe. —
iit a lage test tbe aid fill half of it with a \ \ Spas
water,

2, Shake the test tube closing it with a —

cork. Have the sand and ore separated?

3, Add some powder/liquid soap and a Fig 10.05: Froth Floatation Process.

few drops of kerosene oil.

4. Again shake the corked test tube well,

5. Taking some foam into the watch glass with a spatula examine whether there
is any ore.

6. Sand sinks to the bottom of the test tube and ores float to the surface of

the test tube,

Magnetic Separation Method

The process is used if cither of the ores or gangue has magnetic property.
Crushed ores are passed through a plastic conveyor belt. The outer wheel of the
conveyor belt has the magnetic property. It attracts the magnetic ores or gangue
and they are gathered below and near the wheel. The nonmagnetic portion of the
240 Chenistry

mix gathers separately a little

afar. As a result, the ore is Wheel with

separated from the gangue. megnetic property
The process is applied to :
separate the magnetic ores like
chromites FeQ.Cr,O,, rutile

TiO, etc. Non “ Round

2 magnetic | Magnetic moving
Chemical Method: substance = substance belt
This method is applied if a

particular substance undergoes

a reaction with either of the ores Fig 10.06: Megnetic Seperation.

or gangue. For example, to

obtain aluminium oxide ores from bauxite, chemical method is applied. Bauxite
contains a mix of iron oxide, titanium oxide, sand, impurities ete. Add sodium
hydroxide solution.

(NaOH) with bauxite (Al,O,.211,0) and heating that up to 1500-2000°C will
produce sodium aluminate (NaAlO,):

Al,0,.2H,0+ 2Na0H —A4__ 2Naalo, + 3H,0

When hot sedium aluminate is let to react with water, it produces aluminium
hydroxide and sodium hydroxide. Sodium hydroxide is dissolved while
Aluminium Oxide is collected in the container as residue.

NaAlo, + 2H,0  ——> Al(OH), + NaOH

Heating the separated aluminium hydroxide at 1100°C will produce pure
aluminium oxide and water,

2025
Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 24]

2Al(OH)s _lio0c Al,Os a 5Hj0

Aluminium Hydroxide Aluminium Oxide

This pure aluminium oxide is the output of condensation.

Conversion of Condensed Ore to Oxides: Condensed ore converts into metal
oxide by calcmations or roasting.

Calcinations of Ores: If condensed ore is heated at temperature below the
melting poimt in the absence of air, organic substances and moisture will be
removed from the ore. This process is called calcinations. The calcinations
enforce water, carbonate, bi-carbonate, hydroxide like impurities to be removed
in the form of carbon dioxide or water. If these impurities are not removed at this
stage, it will be tough to remove later.

FeO. 3H,0 —_A_, Fe,0,+ 3H,0 A=heat
znco, ——S-» zn0+ C0,
caco, —4— + ca0+0c0,

Roasting: Generally, roasting is applied for sulfide ores. If sulfide ore is heated
at temperature below the melting point in presence of alr, organic substances and
moisture will be removed from the ore as oxides.

apbs +30, ——“—» 2pbo + 250,

2znS +30, ——“—» 22zn0 +250,

iv. Conversion of Metallic Oxides to Free Metals

The metallic oxides obtamed from the calcinations and roasting needs to
undergo a reduction reaction to extract the metal. The reduction can be done in
various ways like reduction through electrolysis, carbon reduction method and
self-reduction etc, The position of the metal in the series of metal’s reactivity
determmes the method. Below is given a table for your convenience to
understand the methods easily:

Forma-31, Chemistry Class-9-10)
242 Chemistry

Table 10.01: Reactivity Serics of Metal

Metal's Position in the Reactivity Series = Metal Reduction Method
K
Na
Highly reactive metals at the top . Reduction is done through
| rankings : Electrolysis
Mg
Al
i : Zn
Medium standard ~—rreactive Reduction is done through
| metals at the mid level rankings ue Carbon Reduction
Pb
‘ Cu
Less reactive metals at the = Reduction is done through
| bottom rankings 3 Self Reduction
5
| Non-reactive metals at the fag | Pt Found in pure form
end of rankings AU

Reduction by Electrolysis: The top ranking metals in the reactivity series like
K, Na, Ca, Mg and Al undergo reduction by electrolysis. The Aluminium
extraction from Aluminium oxide by electrolysis is described below.

Solid aluminium oxide needs to be melted into liquid first. Aluminium oxide
melts at 2050°C. To raise the temperature so high is very tough. If aluminium
oxide is added with cryolite (Na,AIF,), it melts at 800°C-1000°C. The melted
ALO, consists of AP* and O* jon.

ALO; ——————» _ 2A]? + 30?

A steel container with graphite carbon layer is necessary in the method. The
mixture of aluminium oxide and eryolite is taken in the container and some
carbon rods are dipped in the mixture in a way so that they do not touch the steel
container. The steel container is connected to the negative charge of the

20235
Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 243

battery and the carbon rods are connected to the positive charge. Once the
electric conduction starts, the electrolysis starts too. In the electrolysis, O*

donates electrons at the anode and produces O, gas. Al* present in the solution
accepts the electron at the cathode and turns into Al metal.

607 >» 930, + 12e- (Anode reaction)
2AP*+ 6e& ————> 2al (Cathode reaction)

Carbon anode

Carbon Cathode Mixture of molten

Aluminium oxide and
Cryolite

Steel container
with graphite layer

Molten aluminium

Fig10.07: Alummium Extraction.

Carbon Reduction Method

Metal is extracted by heating carbon along with metallic oxide, For example, Zn
from ZnO, Fe from FeQ, Pb from PbO, or Cu from CuO are extracted this way.

mo4+¢e ——“ ¢ m-co

A

FeQ+C ———+» Fe+cCo

pbo+c — 4S» pb+co

cuo+c —A + Gi+co

This method is called carbon reduction. The mid level position holder metals in
the reactivity series are extracted in this method.

2025
Assignment for Learners: Extraction of lead from lead oxide.

Ingredients: yellow color lead oxide, a piece of white paper, Bunsen
burner, match stick

Caution: the vapors of lead or lead oxide is poisonous. Do not touch it
directly with your hands, Do not breath in this vapor.

Procedure:

i, Lower down the flame of the burner.

ii. Burn a match stick in a way as to leave no residue of Gunpowder.

iti, Wet the burnt out part of the match stick and then add a bit of led

oxide to it,

iv. Hold the led oxide part of the stick on the burner and observe whether
a small point of bright gray coloured molten lead is formed or not.

y. Cool the stick. Put it on the white paper and find out the lead particle.
If necessary, use a lens. If you do not get the lead particle, follow the
procedure ii-iv again.

Comment

i. State the reason for dipping the match stick in water.

ii. Was there any chemical reaction in that action? Show reasons for
your answer.

iii. Where did the carbon come from to free the lead?
iv. Write down the equation of the reaction using formula and words.
v. Will you get the same result if you use copper, iron or zine oxide

instead of lead’? Show reasons.

Ne Z

£023
2025

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 245

Auto-reduction

In the case with the oxides of metals positioned at the lower part of the reactivity
series like Cu, Hg and Ag, only heating instead of any reductant can conduct the
reduction reaction. For example, the ore of mercury can be reduced in the
following way:

HeS +0, ———» Hell) +50,

2HeS + 30, ——__» 2Hg0O/(s) + 250,(g)
2HgO(s) + HgS(s) tt» 3He(/) + S0,(g)

(v) Purification of Metals

The metals obtained from the above reduction methods are not fully pure. They
also contain impurities. Some methods are used to purify them.

The Method of Adding a Smelting Agent

Some impurity still remains with the metal extracted after reduction. The
substance that is added to purify it from the impurity is called a smelting agent.
If the impurity is alkaline, acidic smelting agent (Si0,) will be added and if they
are acidic, alkaline smelting agent will be added. Smelting agent and impurity
combine together into slag. Since slag is insoluble, itis separated from the upper
layer of the solution of molten metal. Even the smelting process does not give a
pure metal. The metal is purified by electrolysis.

Purification by Electrolysis

In purification by electrolysis, the impure metal is used as an anode a rod of the
same metal in pure form is used as a cathode. The salt solution of the metal that
is to be purified is used as an electrolytic solution. When electricity is passed in
the cell, the atom of the metal from the anode donates an electron which enters
the solution as an ion. On the other hand, metallic ion accepts the electron and
adds to the pure metal at the cathode, The method is used for copper and other
metals. The application of the method in purification of copper is described
below.

Purification of Copper by Electrolysis
Copper obtained from reduction method is 98% pure. Electrolysis can yield
246 Chemistry

99.9% pure copper. For this, the
aqueous solution of CuSO, is
taken in a container. The metallic
rod that needs to be purified
connected to the positive charge of pees
a battery is put in the container. It
acts as an anode. A rod of pure
copperisconnectedtothe  neg-
ative charge of the battery and put

in the cell as a cathode. ‘Usual- Fig 10.08: Purification of impure copper
ly, the impure copper rod is thick through electrolysis.

and the pure rod is thin.

Now, as electricity is passed in the cell from the battery, the Cu’ ion from the
impure rod goes into the solution. From the solution, the Cu” goes to the cathode
and gathers with the pure rod as Cu. Oxidation reaction occurs at the anode and
reduction reaction occurs at the cathode.

Pure copper
(vathode)

Cu(s) ————* Cu* + 2e° (Cu** goes to the solution from the impure
copper at the anode)

Cu + 2e°- ———+ Cu(s) (Cu** joins the pure copper cathode from the solution)

Extraction of Iron:

Iron is an important metal. Hematite (Fe:Os) pia
is an important ore of iron. Iron is primarily 1 ineaunine
extracted in three stages:

(1) Concentration

(2) Calcination/ Thermal oxidation, and

(3) Iron is extracted in the furnace by smelt-
ing. Figure 10.09

Several chemical reactions occur in this
process:

Fe,0, +30 ——+ Fer 3co

4Fe,0, + CO,———*  2Fe,0, + CO,

Layer of steel

Brick

Hot air

4

Molten
slag

Hot air
—>

Molten

Fe,o, + CO, ————_ Fe+ CO, iron

Caco, ——* cad+CO,

2025

Ca0:+ SiO, CaSiO, (Molten slag) Fig 10.09: Iron extraction in blast furmace,
2025

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 247

1. The melting point of sodium is 801°C. The melting point of the mixture of
sodium chloride 40-42% and calcium chloride 58-60% is about 600°C. Consider
the above information and describe a method of sodium extraction. You
will consider the following issues:

e Expenses of smelting
e Ifthe mixture is used, will sodium and calcium be free simultaneously?
* Environmental pollution by the products of the reaction.
2. The melting point of aluminium oxide is 2050°C. The melting point of aluminium
oxide and cryolite (Na,AIF,) is 800-1000°C. Consider the above information
and describe method of aluminium extraction.
Additionally, you will consider:
« Expenses of smelting
* If the mixture is used, will sodium and calcium be free simultaneously?
* Environmental pollution by the products of the reaction.
3. What kind of environmental pollution is caused by the byproduct gas of
copper extraction? How do you prevent this kind of harm (acid rain)? How

do you think this gas may be used profitably without causing harm to the
environment?

Metal Ore Extraction Method Remarks
Mercury | Cinnabar (HgS)
Zinc Zinc blend (4nS)
Calamine (ZnCO;)
Lead Galena (PbS)
Iron Magnetite (Fe:O4)
Hematite (Fe,Os)
‘Limonite(FesO;.3H 0)
Copper Copper pyrites (CuFeS,)
Celcoisite (Cu;S)
Aluminium) Bauxite (Al,03.2H,O)
Sodium Brine (NaCl)
ee Lime stone (CaCO) i

248 Chemistry

(4. Look at the picture and answer the questions: >)

Write the equations of the probable reactions that will occur in the furnace
in language and in formulas. You should consider: Silicon dioxide is
present in the ore as gangue. The product of the reaction may undergo
reactions with the reactants and other products,

5.Write the equation of the probable reaction of metal extraction from the
ores presented in the table. Give opinion in favour of your answer in the

remarks column,

NL at

10.3 Selected Alloys

Metal alloy is a mixture of metals made by mixing some molten metals and
cooling them. The time between 5000 BC to 3000 BC is called the Copper age in
history. The humans at this time used to make ornaments, weapons and
machineries with copper. However, since copper is a soft metal, things made of
copper did not last long. That is why, people in that period used to mix molten
copper with molten tin. Then they used to cool the mixture and get bronze.
Basically, bronze is an alloy. The solid substance obtained from mixing any
molten metal or nonmetal with another molten metal and cooling the mixture ts
called an alloy. The invention of alloy by those ancient people was an
epoch- making invention. The 3000 BC to 1000 BC is called the Bronze age. In
this period, people used to make weapons and machineries with bronze. Alloys
are more effective than metals in making different machineries. Iron and carbon
are mixed to make steel which is another alloy. Again, mixing molten carbon,
nickel and chromium, in hot, molten iron, we get stamless steel. The knives and
scissors that doctors use in the hospitals are made of stainless steel. Molten
copper and molten zinc together produce another alloy named brass. Brass is
used in electric switches, utensils etc, Crockery are made of bronze which is an
alloy of copper and tin. A mix of aluminium, magnesium, manganese and iron
produces the alloy named duralmin which is used in making the body of planes.

fi
|
=>
oy
Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 249

Table 8.02: Different alloys and their uses.

Alloy Ingredients and Use
Composition ;
Steel Tron 99% Rail and wheels, engines, ships, vehicles, |
Carbon 1% crane, weapons, knives, scissors, watch

springs, magnets, agricultureal tools

Rust free steel | Iron 74% Knives, forks, kitchen sinks, containers

(Stainless Chromium 18% of chemical industries, operation tools
Steel) Nickel 8%
Brass Copper 65% Ornaments, ball-bearings, electric
Fine 35% switches, door knobs, utensils
BEBE Copper 90% Melting machineries, plates, glasses
Tin 10%
; Twine 35
us! Copper 4% on Body of airplanes, bicycle parts
Magnesium,
Manganese and iron
1% | .
24 carat gold | Gold 100% | Dentistry, coins, electronic connectors
22 carat gold Gold 91.67% Ornaments
Copper and other

metals 8.33%

Ql carat gold | Gold 87.5% Ornaments
Copper and other
metals 12.5%

You have learned that alloys are compositions of various metals. These
compositions do not contain equal amounts of the metals to mix. In alloys, one
metal is the representative metal while the other metals are non-representative
metals. For example, in bronze, the representative metal copper is 65% while
there is 35% zinc. The alloy is named after the representative metal. Steel has
99% iron and 1% carbon. Therefore, steel is called the alloy of iron. In the same

Forma-32, Chentustry Class-9-10
250 Chemistry

way, brass is 90% copper and 10% tin which makes it an alloy of copper. Again,
in brass, there is 65% copper and 35% zinc, Therefore, brass is also copper’s

alloy.

10.4 Symptoms, Causes and Prevention of Corrosion of
Certain Metals and Alloys

If things made of iron or iron alloy are left in the open for a long time, their
surfaces produce a reddish brown substance. This substance is called rust. Iron
decays by producing rust. Similarly, if things made of pure copper, brass or
bronze are exposed to the air for a long ime, a black/brown/green layer is creat-
ed. This layer is called copper slag. Copper decays producing copper slag.

Generally, exposure of pure metals and their alloys to open air for a long time
ereates a different coloured substance which is known as corrosion of metals.

The substance created due to corrosion of iron is hydrated ferric oxide
(Fe,O,.nH,0). Differently coloured copper slag has different elements in them
like cuprous oxide (Cu,O), cuprous sulfide or celcoisite (Cu,S) etc. That is why;
the copper slag does not have a specific formula. Some metals usuallydonate
electrons to turn into positive ions when they are exposed to open air. Here, an
oxidation reaction occurs. Some ingredient of the atmosphere accepts that
electron and tums into a negative ion in a reduction reaction. Then, the positive
and negative ion combines into a new compound. The new compound
undergoes a reaction with the metal and corrodes the metal.

The rusting reaction on iron occurs very slowly and in steps. In one step.
oxidation occurs and in another reduction occurs. It requires oxygen (O,) and
water (11,0) from the atmosphere. Water of the atmosphere converts into H* and
OF.

Ho —-» Ht+0H

20235
2025

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 251

When iron comes in contact with H” of open air, it donates electrons and tums
into Fe?*. It is oxidation.

2Fe ———» 1 2Fe** 4 dem

The electrons donated by Fe is accepted by O, and H* to produce H,O by
reduction.

0, + 4H*+ 4e° ————» 2H,0

At this stage, Fe", H” and O, undergo a reaction and produce Fe** and water.

4Fe* +4Ht + 0, —————» 4Fe*+ + 2H,0

Then, Fe** undergoes a reaction with OH’ and produces Fe(OH)..
Fe + 30H” ——+ Fe(OH),

This ferric hydroxide turns into hydrated ferric oxide or rust Fe,O,.3H,O.

2Fe(OH), + Fe205.3H,0

(- Experiment of the Formation of Rust
* Take four test tubes and mark them | to 4.

* Take the necessary measures to make them similar to the figure.
* Boil the water of test tube 3 for a minute and add 1 mL cooking oil

or olive oil to the water. The oil will restrict the air from entermg the
water.

\s Preserve the test tubes in this situation for a week and observe. SS

252

Chemistry

Keep testtubes for a week and observe

5 Air : - water Aur

Fig 10.10: Experiment of rust on iron (Boil the water to remove dissolved

Me oxygen from water).

|_— Oxygen

— Cold water

2 ) 8
‘ten _ Oil layer
PA nail ;
Anhydrous / ) |_—Boil water /
e Cla i Wy

P

Prevention of Metal Corrosion

Metals and their alloys do not corrode if
they are not in direct contact with air. This
can be done in various ways like painting,
electroplating, galvanizing etc. The iron
made doors and windows of our homes are
painted so that they do not come in direct
contact with air. We know that the less
reactive metals usually do not undergo
reactions with oxygen but the more reactive
metals rapidly undergo reactions with
oxygen of air and water. Therefore, a
coating of a less reactive metal is laid on
more reactive metals. Thus the more
reactive metals are saved from corrosion.
The coating can also be given by
electroplating and galvanizing.

Copper (anode)

Fig 10.11: Copper electroplating on

key.

£023
2025

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 253

Electroplating

Generally speaking, the method of laying a coating of less reactive metal on
more reactive metals by electrolysis is called electroplating. In this method, the
metal that will be the coating is connected to the positive charge of the battery
and the metal that will get the coating is connected to the negative charge. Then
the electroplating is done through electrolysis. For example, to add a coating of
copper on iron, a solution of CuSO, is taken. The copper rod is connected to
the positive charge while the iron rod is connected to the negative charge. As
electricity is passed in the cell, Cu donates two electrons which go into the
solution as Cu*.
cu. ——>_ Cu + 2e° [Oxidation reaction|

Now, this Cu* accepts two electrons from the Fe rod to become Cu and attaches
to the Fe rod.

Cutt + 2e° Cu [Reduction reaction]

Galvanizing : The method of laying zine coating on any metal is called
galvanizing. It does not require electrolysis. Zinc is coated anyway on any
metal.

Recycling of Metals

The amount of every element is definite in the world. After using metallic
products, instead of discarding them, they are sent to the factories for making
that metal. Usable metal is made from that trashed metal. This method is called
Recycling of metal. For example, trashed aluminium utensils are sent to
aluminium factories to recycle new aluminium. Trashed iron is sent to steel mills
for recycling. 21% of the total copper used in America is recycled copper. 60%
of aluminium used in Europe is recycled aluminium.
254 Chemistry

10.5 Nonmetal Minerals

The nonmetal that are extracted from mines are called nonmetal minerals. Sulfur
is anonmetal mineral extracted from mines.

Sulfur

Sulfur is a yellow coloured substance. Sulfur mines are situated deep inside the
earth. The substance is extracted from mines by the Frasch method. Three tubes
with a single center is inserted into the depth of the sulfur layer which is known
as a Frasch pipe. Sulfur melts at 115°C temperature. That is why super heated
water is sent through the pipe to the layer so that the element melts. We know, at
1 atm pressure, the boiling point of water is 100°C but if pressure is increased the
boiling point rises up. Water at any teroaperature between 100-374°C temperature
al extra pressure is called super heated water. Hot air is passed at 20-22 atm
pressure through the centre tube. Molten sulfur comes out through the middle
tube due to the effect of the pressure. It is collected in containers.

Use of Sulfur

Sulfur is used in large amounts

Ar ——_,
in different industries.

Liquid sulfur

i. It is used in the preparation of
sulfuric acid.
ii. It is added to rubber to make

Super heated

water

rubber more sustainable, The Rock

method is called vulcanizing of | Smiing |
sulfur
rubber.
i. Sulfanide is used in the Liquid sulfur
preparation of various Fig 10.12: Frasch Method of Sulfur Extraction.

medicines. It kills bacteria, It

is produced from sulfur.

2025
2025

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 255

Sulfur Compounds

Some important sulfur compounds are discussed below.

Sulfur Dioxide
Sulfur undergoes a reaction with oxygen from air to produce sulfur dioxide.

5+0; —— 50,

Sulfur dioxide is a highly toxic gas with an acute odour which harms our body if
it enters inside through our mouth and nose. It creates burning sensation in the
eyes. If coal and petroleum contains sulfur. burning them produces SO, gas. This
goes into the au. During rain, it undergoes reaction with water and produces
sulfurous acid (H,SO,) which comes back on earth with rain water. This is acid
ram.

50;+ H,Q ———* H,50,

Sulfuric Acid

Of all the chemical, sulfuric acid is the highest used and so it is called the king of
chemicals. Sulfuric acid is prepared from solid sulfur in the industries. The
method of its preparation is called the Contact method.

The Contact Method: The method is described in the steps below:

Concentrated
Catalyst HLS0,
V0,
Sulfur —»: =—* Vapor
AAA

Oliurn
Hy5:O>

—+Sulfuric acid
Hy504

Furnace

Fig 10.12: Preparation of Sulfuric Acid by Contact Method.
256 Chemistry

Step 1: Firstly, sulfur and dehydrated air are supplied in a furnace. Sulfur and
oxygen undergo reaction here to produce sulfur dioxide.

$+0, ————~ 50,

Step 2: The SO, gas is channeled with some more oxygen to another furnace.
This furnace has the temperature of 450-500°C and the catalyst vanadium
penta-oxide, SO, gas and O, gas undergo reaction here at that temperature to
produce sulfur tri-oxide.

250, + 0; —_——— 250,

Step 3: When SO, comes in contact with H,O, H,SO, is produced. However,
direct reaction between them will produce gaseous H,SO, which will create a
state of dense fog. That is a hazard for the industries. Besides, getting liquid
H,SO, from this gaseous H,SO, by condensation is a tough task. So, first, sulfur
tri-oxide is absorbed in concentrated H,SO, and that forms fuming
sulfuric acid. (Fuming sulfuric acid is called oilium. The formula is H,5,0..)

Fe ie

H,S0, + SOs, ——_—+ H,5,0

The fuming sulfuric acicl is then driven into a reaction with H,O which produces

liquid sulfuric acid.
25,07 + H,0 SEE cool 2H,50,

The Properties of Sulfuric Acid

Acid Property: Dilute or concentrated H,SO, undergoes a reaction with any
alkali to produce salt and water. This is called the acid property of sulfuric acid.
For example, sulfuric acid reacts with calcium hydroxide and produces calcium
sulfate salt and water.
H350, + Ca(OH). —$§|——r» Cad0, + 2H,0
Sulfuric acid Calcium hydroxide Calcium sulfate Water

Oxidation Property: If a lot of water is added to H,SO,, the solution is called
dilute sulfuric acid. It does not have the oxidation property. But the concentrated
sulfuric acid has the oxidation property. It oxidizes copper and produces copper
sulfate and reduces itself into sulfur dioxide and water.

2025
Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 257
2H,50, (Concentrated)+ Cu —————® CuSO, + SO, + 2H,0

Dehydrating Property: The substance that absorbs water from any compound
is called a dehydrating agent. This property in a chemical is its dehydrating
property. Dilute H,SO, does not show any dehydrating property but this is not
true in the concentrated case. The concentrated H,SO, absorbs water from sugar
(C,,H,,0,,). So, concentrated sulfuric acid is a dehydrating agent.

CigHy201, + H350, ————* 12C + H250,.11H,0

(. Take 2-3 mL lime water in a test
tube and add a few drops of dilute
sulfuric acid to it. Observe the
change minutely and write the
reasons. Write the probable
equation.

« Take a pinch of potassium iodide
KI in a test tube and add a few
drops of concentrated sulfunc
acid to it. Observe the change
minutely and explain the reasons,
Write the probable equation.

* Take a spoonful of sugar C,.H,,O,, in a test tube and add a few drops of
concentrated sulfuric acid to it. Observe the change minutely and write
the reasons. Write the probable equation. You need to be cautious when
doing the experiment.

* What property of sulfuric acid (acid, oxidation and dehydrating
properties) is exhibited in which of the above three experiments? Explain
each of them.

e Follow the pie chart of figure 10.13 containing usage of sulfuric acid and
based on your reading, analyze the economic significance of sulfuric
acid in Bangladesh.

Forma-33, Chemistry Class-9-10

Pigment 20%

Fig 10,13; Usage of Sulfuric Acid.

258 Chemistry

1. Which of the records in the table exhibits the characteristics of a metal?

Melting | Boiling | pens: Melting | Boiling Densi

Point [Point [on But (Pont po
a. 1539 2887 7.86 b. | -219 183 | 0.002
ce. | -113 45 0.79 d. | 117 888 | 1,96

Answer the questions 2 and 3 from the following stem:

A group of students were investigating rust. They kept nails in four test tubes
according to the figure below:

Air Bail water aie Onyern
2 8
, oil layer
ipo.
nail
Boiled water
anhydrous i .
ACh / / > Cold water

2. Which of the test tubes nail will exhibit the highest amount of rust?
a. 1 b, 2" c. 3 d. 4"

3. The decisions that can be reached from the experiment are:
i. Rusting needs oxygen
ii. Salt is acting as a catalyst

iii. The presence of oxygen only does not confirm rust.
Which is correct?

a. iand ii b. ii and iti
c. Land ili d. i, i and tii
4, Which of the following specimens of gold is hardest?
a. 18 karat b. 21 karat
c. 22 karat d. 24 karat

5. Sulfuric acid is added to water in drops during the dilution method because
sulfuric acid-

i. has a high hydration enthalpy

ii, is a di-alkaline acid
lili. is a corrosive substance

20235
2025

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 259

Which is correct?
a. 1 b. tand ii
c. liand i d. 1, ii and ni
6. By absorbing SO, in 98% sulfuric acid, the required amount of water is added
for dilution because sulfuric acid-
i. forms a deep mist with water vapors
ii. emits a huge amount of temperature on addition of water.
iii, is a dehydrating agent.
Which one is correct?

ai b. iand ii

c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iti
7. Which of the followings is a gangue?

a. Al,O. b. ZnS c. SiO, d. PbS
&. Cinnabar is an alloy to the metal

a. Mercury b. Copper ce. Zinc d. Lead

9, What is the melting point of aluminium?
a. 2050°C b, 2000°C
ec. 1000°C d. 950°C
10. Which of the following metals is more reactive?
a, Cu b. Zn
c. Fe d. Pb
11. Copper slag consists of
i, CuCO,
i. CuSO,
i. Cu(OH),
Which one is correct?
a. land ii b. iand ii
c. iiand iti d. i, ii and iu

12. What ts the composition of tin in bronze?
a. 90% b. 65%
c. 35% d. 10%
260 Chemistry

1. Zn metal is extracted by taking the ZnO produced in heat reduction of
calamine in a retort shown in the figure below. Produced metal is purified
by electrolysis.

Prolong
- femail cooler}

Mixture of zinc oxide and coke Soot
Write the chemical formula of calamine.

Explain heat reduction.

Explain the principal reaction occurring in the retort.

Write the chemical formula of calamine.

Explain heat reduction.

Explain the principal reaction occurring in the retort.

Evaluate why metal is extracted in three steps, not by electrolysis only.
2. Some minerals mixed with bauxite and calamine were found in a mine.
A group of scientists under the leadership of Dr. Thomas extracted two
metals in two different ways.

a. What is the mineral?
b. Explain, “Not every metal is an ore”.
c. Explain the nature of oxides found in the dissociation of the second ore,
d. Write with logic the cause of extraction of two metals in two
different ways.
3. If we burn an element belonging to Group 16 of the periodic table in
open air, we get an oxide A. The oxide is a highly toxic gas with an acute
odor. A can produce an acid B in the industrial sector if we apply Le
Chatelier’s principle.
a. What is an ore?
b. An oxide is acidic- explain.
c, Describe the method of preparation of an acid B.
d, The oxidation property of B acid depends on its density- explain
with logic.

ao cape op

£023
