2025

Concepts of Chemistry 3

1.1 Introduction to Chemistry

In prehistoric times, people did not know how to wear clothes, or how to build
houses. Even they did not know how to cook and eat. How much people are
advancing today in the age of digitalization! They are controlling heat and using
it for various purposes, and eventually learning to generate electricity, So many
things people are doing by using electricity! By using the internet, people can
see what is happening around the world just staying at home. All these are
contributions of science. As a result, naturally the question arises- what is
science? Science is the systematic, orderly and continuous effort of mankind to
manipulate nature for their own betterment. There are many branches of science
and chemistry is one of the major branches. [Question: Write the names of vari-
ous branches of science. |

Here the question is- what is chemistry? The branch of science which deals with
the composition of compounds composed of elements, structure and nature,
properties, uses, etc. 1s called chemistry. It also deals with the mutual conversion
or transformation of objects, and absorption and emission of energy (mainly
thermal energy) during the conversion.

We know that burning coal produces heat as well as carbon dioxide compounds.
Some of the examples of chemistry are the rusting of iron or iron-made objects
when left in a moist environment, the extraction of medicines and perfumes
from the extracts of various plants, the extraction of various metals from ores,
etc. Thus, it can be said that from prehistoric times, people have been using
chemistry in different ways knowingly or unknowingly. According to the mfor-
mation available so far, the first metal used is copper. Apart from that, people
have been using metals like gold, silver, un, iron ete. since ancient times.

Humans learned to melt copper and tin, mix them and cool the mixture into
another hard alloy named bronze at around 3500 BC. Bronze was used to make
quality weapons. These were used by the people to hunt animals, cultivate crops,
cut fire wood etc. This alloy became an essential product of the then human race.
Bronze contributed a lot to the progress of human civilization.

Like bronze, people have made many alloys, including steel, and are using them
for various purposes. [Question: Gold used in the manufacture of jewelry is an

alloy. — Explain. |
4 Chenustry

The ancient philosophers used to think a lot about structure of matters. The
Greek philosopher Democritus declared in 380 BC that, a small particle will be
available at a stage when we synthesize any metal. This particle is indivisible
and he called it atom. Some Indian philosophers of the age also had similar

views. But none of these ideas had a practical base. Aristotle opposed this idea.
He along with another school of philosophers believed all matters are made of

soil, fire, water and wind. ‘Chat is why humans did not accept the idea of atom for
quite a long time.

Fig 1.01: Antony Lavorsiere, Robert Boyle, Sir Francis Bacon and John Delton,

In the mediaeval age, some Arab Muslim philosophers tried to make gold out of
cheaper materials like copper, tin and lead. They also tried to get an elixir which
would lengthen the life of humans. Though they failed in their original attempts
yet they wrote down their experiments. Basically, these were the earliest
attempts of systematic study of chemistry or experimentation. These mediaeval
Arab experimentation with chemistry was called Alchemy and the philosophers
were known as Alchemists. The term Alchemy comes from the Arabic word
Al-Chimia which again takes its ongin from Chemi or Kimi. The word
chemistry comes from this chemi. Alchemist Jabir Al Hiyan is the first scientist
to hold chemical experiment in a laboratory. That is why he is sometimes called
the father of chemistry. Jabir al Hiyan believed all matters are composed of four
components- soil, fire, water and wind. Therefore, although experimented, Jabir
was not very clear about the mysteries of chemistry. Scientists including Antony
Lavorsiere, Robert Boyle, Sir Francis Bacon and John Dalton are the first school

£023
2025

Concepts of Chemistry 5

to start experimenting with chemistry understanding the real spirit of this

science. Antony Lavorsiere is called the father of modern chemistry.

and changes is called chemistry.

| The branch of science that discusses the structure of matter, its nature

Table 1.01: Explanation of different incidents in every day life in terms of
chemistry ,

Subject

Analysis

A green mango is
sour while a
ripened mango is
sweel

There remain various organic acids like suecinic acid,
malloic acid etc. in a green mango which makes it sour. As
it ripens, these acids transform into glucose and fructose in
chemical reactions and turns the mango sweet.

Burning of The main component of these elements is hydrocarbon
kerosene, which is a composite form of carbon and hydrogen. When
natural gas and we burn them, carbon and hydrogen react with oxygen of
bites air and produce carbon-di-oxide, vapour and heat.

Taking antacid Acidity occurs in the stomach when excess hydrochloric
due to acidity in | acid is generated inside, Antacid contains aluminum
stomach hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide. These two

| compounds neutralize hydrochloric acid.

These incidents are sufficient to tell you that our life is irrevocably related to
chemistry, Therefore, chemistry is one of the important branches of science.

1.2 The Scopes of Chemistry

Wherever there is element, there is chemistry. Various gascous elements are
there in the air. There are continuous chemical changes occurring in the air. The
same is there in the soil we are living on. It is happening now, it happened in the
ancient days too. The earth was highly heated at the moment of its creation.
There was no wind, nor any animal. It took millions of years of chemical
reactions for the creation of atmosphere, water and thousands of other elements.
These altogether contributed to the habitability ofthe earth for animals. All
6 Chemistry

animals including human beings, microscopic lives like bacteria, amoeba, huge
trees and animals have bodies which contain various kinds of chemicals. Each
body is a kind of chemical factory where chemical reactions are taking place
every moment. We live because of these chemical reactions. Again, with the
advent of civilization, humans have produced various necessary items and
products by means of chemical reactions and put them to their use. For example,
the dresses you put on, the paste you brush your teeth with, the corab you fix
your hair with, the cosmetics you use on your skin- all are chemical products.
Besides, soap, toilet cleaner, life saving drugs, all are chemicals too. We use
fertilizers and insecticides in our field crops, use petrol, diesel etc. in vehicles.
These are industrial products made out of chemical reactions. In fact, the scope
of Chemistry is so vast that it cannot be summarized easily, The table below tries
io present some of the scopes in brief:

Table 1.02: Some scopes of chemistry.

Substance Element Source and Chemical Change

When we inhale air, the oxygen in it reacts with
the food substances inside our body and produces
energy.

Air Mostly oxygen

Water plays a role in the chemical reactions that
lake place inside our body. It also works as
Drinking | Hydrogen, solvent of various substances in the body. The
water oxygen and poisonous substances in the body mix with water
mineral salts | and come out in the form of urine and sweat,
Mineral salts such as calcium, magnesium etc,
play a vital role for our body. People may die if
there is a lack of water in the body (dehydration).
This is the main cause of death of people in chol-
era.

Just as we eat food, plants also need food. The

main components of plant food are nitrogen,

oxygen, carbon, oxygen, phosphorus, carbon etc. Plants collect

phosphorous, | them from the soil. Besides, various fertilizers

contain compounds of these elements. Different
fertilizers contain compounds of these substances.
As a result, these fertilizers act as

ar Nitrogen,
Fertilizer g

2025
2025

Concepts of Chemistry 7

calcium, nutrients and help get a good crop.
magnesium,
potassium etc.

Paper is one of the most significant inventions of)
Paper Cellulose human civilization, Bamboo. the outer skin of
sugarcane etc. contain huge amounts of eelisloas
The paper mills turn these sources into paper by

means of chenucal reaction. |

1.3 Relationship Between Chemistry and Other Branches
of Science

There are various branches of science like chemistry, biology, physics,
mathematics, environmental science, soil science etc. Fach of these branches is
related to the other branches. Very nauch like the other branches are related to
chemistry, so is chemistry related to the other branches. Let us now check the
relationship with some examples.

Relationship with Biology: All plants produce glucose on their green parts in
the photosynthesis process, Photosynthesis is basically a chemical process.
Plants take in carbon-di-oxide from air and water from the soil. Then it uses the
chlorophyll of its green parts to produce glucose in the reaction between water
and carbon dioxide. Animal bodies synthesize the proteins of animal's intake and
produce glucose, amino acid etc. All animal bodies are indeed stuffed with
various chemicals. Biology discusses these chemicals and chemical
reactions that take place inside the bodies of plants and animals, That is where
the two sciences are interrelated

Relationship with Physics: Physics discusses magnet, electricity. different
machines etc. Battery used for getting electricity is contribution of chemistry.
Energy gleaned by burning oil, gas or coal is the source for vehicles and
electricity. Chemistry is also dependent on physics. Physical chemistry is a
branch of chemistry, the theories of which are essentially dependent on theories
and formulas of physics.
8 Chemistry

Relationship with Mathematics: Mathematics has a close relationship with

chemistry, In various fields of chemistry, especially in calculations, from simple
mathematical formulas to complex ones are used. For example, determining the
conceniration of a solution, determining the composition of a compound, deter-
mining the rate of a reaction, etc.

In the same way, chemistry is directly and indirectly related to the other branches
of science too.

1.4 The Importance of Studying Chemistry

Imagine what happens on a typical day with you. You use toothpaste. once you
get up from bed in the morning. Then you start reading your books. Your mother
serves you biscuits and tea, After finishing that, you take your bath. When you
enter the washroom, you find it a bit unclean. You use toilet cleaner to clean it
and then have bath using scented soap and shampoo. You use lotions after bath.
Then you take your breakfast and go to school. The teacher there uses chalk on
the board to simplify your lessons. Now, do you see, all the things you are using,
e.g. paste, biscuit, tea, toilet cleaner, soap, shampoo, chalk etc. are contributions
of chemistry.

Not only that, we use fertilizers to increase fertility of fields, use insecticides to
keep away insects {rom our crops, preservatives to store the food for a longer
time. This way, the whole process of food and cultivation is dependent on
chemistry.

Today, cholera, typhoid, tuberculosis etc. are curable diseases but they were once
killer diseases. Thanks to chemistry, we have been relieved from the dreadfulness
of recent corona. - How can you justify? Millions of people died of them in the
ancient days. Humans have invented cures for them by means of their knowledge
of chemistry. Nowadays,the field of medicine has developed so much that

many people are cured of different cancers too.

Chemical wastes from industries, vehicles, consumer products etc. are doing
harm to our environment. These contain carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide,
sulphur dioxide, various acids, heavy metals like mercury, lead, arsenic. cobalt
etc. When they come in contact with air, air is polluted, when they come in touch
with water, water gets polluted. They enter human bodies and harm them. Again,
use of excess chemicals is harraful for us. Insecticides help us save our crops but
excess insecticide gets washed away to the water bodies, polluting the water.

2025
Concepts of Chemistry 9

Some of it gets vaporized and pollute the air. Chemistry tells you all these
natural and life oriented facts.

By now you should have understood that chemistry plays a significant role in
our advancement but excess of it is harmful for us and nature as well. Many
diseases are still there which do not have cures. Our duty is to study chemistry
and try inventing those drugs. Therefore, learning chemistry does not only
benetit us by means of newer inventions, it also helps us realize how we are
harming our nature. Your learning chemistry will take the world steps ahead.
That is our expectation.

1.5 The Process of Research in Chemistry

The aim of science is the betterment of humanity. Scientists are constantly
working with the same aim in their minds. The term scientist certainly rings the
names of great scientists like Einstein, Newton, Archimedes, Lavoisier, Galileo
etc. They are obviously great scientists. However, the meaning of the term
scientist has the scope for you too to be called so. Indeed, science is that
knowledge which is gleaned out of systematic experimentation. The process to
glean knowledge by experimenting 1s known as research. One who carries out
such research is a scientist.

Therefore, if you carry out research, you can also be a scientist. Experimenting
through a perfect and systematic process in order to learn something ts called
research. It means, there is a certain procedure to carry out a research. Research
in chemistry also follows some procedure. Now we shall learn the steps of this
procedure.

In the first step of a research, you need to determine what you want to learn or
what new thing you want to invent. Suppose, you want to learn whether heat will
be produced or absorbed as ammonium chloride is dissolved in water. This is
known as topic selection.

In the second step, you have to investigate the matter. At this stage, you will read
some books or some papers from the internet and other sources in order to learn

Forma-2, Chemistry Class-9-10
10 Chemistry

how such kind of an experiment was carried out by someone else and what
result it did yield. Suppose, you have learned that another chemical compound
calcium oxide, when dissolved in water, produces heat. You will also be able to
learn what kind of apparatus, chemicals and steps were followed in this
experiment, That will give you an idea about what things you will require to
conduct the test yourself. Besides, you will have an idea about the probable
result- in this case, if you dissolve ammonium chloride in water, heat will be
produced,

Again, you will be able to decide what kind of materials you are going to use and
what will be the steps of the experiment. You came to know that you would need
a beaker, water, ammonium chloride, thermometer, glass rod, balance etc. First

you will take water in the beaker. You Table 1.03: Dissolving ammonium
will record the temperature of the chloride in water.
water in the beaker with the |Quantity of dissolved [Temperature
: ammonium chloride in ofthe
thermometer. Thea, you will weigh galeh of beatae La aior
ammonium chloride using the balance
and mix and dissolve that with the
glass rod in the water, a number of | 59 20°C
times. Each time, you need to check
the temperature of water. This is the
procedure of your experiment. Now | j59 10°C
you can start your experiment.

Og (nothing dissolved) 25°C

10g 15°C

Take 250mL water in the beaker and check the temperature. Suppose, the
present temperature is 25°C. Record it in your notebook. Now, with the help of
the balance, weigh 5g ammonium chloride and mix it in the water. Use the glass
rod to stir so that it gets dissolved. As soon as the chemical is dissolved, measure
and record the temperature. Now the temperature is 20°C. Add, mix and dissolve
another 5¢@ of ammonium chloride in the beaker. See what the
temperature is with 10g chemical in the water. Follow the same procedure again.
Now the beaker’s water has 15g of dissolved ammonium chloride and let’s
suppose the temperature is 10°C. Record the data in your notebook.

20235
2025

Concepts of Chemistry lt

If you analyze the data shown above, you will see, the more ammonium chloride
is dissolved in water, the less the temperature of water becomes, You will decide,
since dissolving ammonium chloride in water decreases the temperature of
water, anamonium chloride absorbs heat from water in order to get dissolved.
The result is dissolving ammonium chloride in water results in absorption of
temperature. The steps followed by you in the above experiment can be shown
in the following flowchart:

Fig 1.02: Steps in a research in Chemistry,

Whenever you are dealing with some research in chemistry, you are required to
follow the same steps.

1.6 Safety Measures in Chemistry Laboratory and in use
of Chemicals.

The place where scientific experiments are held is called the laboratory.
Similarly, the place where experiments of chemistry are held is called Chemistry
laboratory. It is understood, there will be various chemicals in a chemistry
laboratory. Almost all chemicals are harmful to some extent for us as well as our
environment. Some chemicals are prone to explosion, some are flammable,
some harm our body directly and some are dangerous for nature. Most of the
apparatus in a chemistry laboratory are made of glass. Therefore, we need to be
cautious from the moment of entry into the laboratory to the moment we come
out. Lack of caution may result m accidents, e.g. if acid falls on your body, you
will get injured; if acid falls on your dress, the dress will be spoiled. Besides,
there may be accidents including fire or explosion in a laboratory. Therefore,
12 Chemistry

you need to wear an apron. The apron will be knee-long and the sleeves will be
up to your wrist. Its colour will be white. You will use hand gloves and safety
cogeles on your eyes. Some of these safety measures are given in the following
picture:

Below are some pictures of thmgs that need to be used in the chemistry
laboratory for self-protection.

Fig 1.03: Safe dresses anc kits in a laboratory.

We need to learn the nature of a chemical before we start to use it. We need to
know whether that is flammable or radio-active. These are made clear using
some signs on the containers. To introduce a globally harmonized system about
this, the United Nations organized a conlerence named Environment and
Development. This conference gave a set of harmonized signs for different risky
substances and their level of risk. The table below contains some signs and their
explanations identifying risk, extent of risk and precautions.

£023
2025

Concepts of Chemistry

Table 1.04:

13

signs and their explanations identifying risk.

Risk, Extent of risk and precaution

We neéd to be very careful about these substances. We

must keep in mind that friction and fire may cause
serious explosion from these which will be harmful for
our body as well as the laboratory. We need extreme
caution in handling these. TNT, organic peroxide,
nitroglycerine etc. are such kind of substances.

Flammable substance

Alcohol, ether ete. are flammable. These may catch
fire quickly. Therefore, we need to keep them away
from fire or heat.

Toxic substance

Substances with this sign are poisonous. If we come in
touch with them or inhale them, they may cause harm
to our body. Benzene, chlorobenzene, methanol, etc.
are such substances. We must wear apron, hand gloves
and safety gogeles when handling them.

Irritant substance

Cement dust, light acids, base, nitrous oxide etc, cause
irritation on skin, eyes and breathing system. We must
wear aprons, hand gloves and safety goggles when
handling them.

Hazardous substance

Direct contact on skin or inhalation of such substances
may cause short or long term harm to our health. They
may affect our breathing system or even cause diseases
like cancer. Benzene, toluene, xylene are such
substance. We must wear aprons, hand gloves and
satety goggles when handling them.

14

Radioactive substance

These substances emit harmful rays which may cause
diseases like cancer or disable somebody. We need to
be extremely cautious in handling these. Uranium,
radium etc. are of this kind.

Dangerous for

environment

Substances with this sign are dangerous for
the environment, meaning, they harm both animals and
plants. They require caution when in use. Again, they
have to be gathered in a place after use. They have to
be recycled as much as possible. That way, they cannot
do much harm to the environment.

Corrosive

These cause injury to body in contact. Inhalation of
such substances may cause injury inside the body.
Hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid etc. are examples of
this kind.

a, preservatives
c, ethylene

Which of the following substances is used for preserving processed
food fora long time?

b, vinegar
d, acetylene

2025
2025

Concepts of Chemistry 15

2, What does the following sign indicate?

a. explosive substance b. flammable substance
c. radioactive substance d. flame of fire

3, Which of the following signs indicate a radioactive substance?

oe uy
4, Which of the following metals is melted and mixed with copper to produce bronze?
a. iron b. zine

c. tin d. lead

A
Fig A: Boy taking pills Fig 8: Spraying insecticide in the agriculture field

a. What is research?
b. Why does tipe mango taste sweei?
c. How is the figure A related to chemistry- explain,

d. Which of the activities of the stem, when done in excess, is harmful
for the environment- answer with reasons.
