2025

Hydrosphere 103

1. The gravity of the sun and moon: When the Sun and Moon are aligned with the
Earth, water levels in ocean surfaces fronting them are pulled and subsequently rise.
The Moon, although much smaller than the Sun, is much closer. Now, gravitational
forces decrease rapidly as the distance between two masses widen. Thus, the Moon's
gravity has a larger effect on tides than the Sun. In fact, the Sun's effect is only
about half of the Moon's.

2. Centrifugal force produced from rotation of the earth: The centrifugal force
produced from the rotation of the earth draws away from the centre of rotation. The
creation of tides also al the opposite of high tides (fig. 6.5).

Fig. 6.5 : Influence of centrifugal and gravitational force of the earth

High tide: A high tide can be defined as the cyclic rise and fall of sea level

caused by the gravitational pull of the sun and moon. There are usually two high
tides and two low tides in each lunar day.

Low tide : Low tide refers to the movement of the high tide out to the sea. In
other words, it is the time during the tidal period when the high tide is falling.

Effects of tides

Tides have a vast influence on human life, The following effects can be exerted by
tides on the coastal countries of the world,

1. Tides can bring all the river wastes collected from lands and fall into the oceans.

2. The occurrence of tides twice a day causes no siltation and wastes can be deposited
in the estuaries.

3. Tides can deepen the passage of the rivers through undercutting.
104 Geography and Environment

4. Hydroelectricity can be produced by creating dams on the tidal rivers.
5. Tides facilitate irrigation and ultimately help the agricultural sector.

6. In Polar Regions the salty ocean water enters into the lands through rivers that help
to free the flow of river water,

7. Tides help the free movement of vessels that generate trades. During tides the
estuaries get sufficient water that helps the vessels to enter into the lands. During
tide the vessels can go out from the inland rivers to the ocean. Patenga and
Mongla,the two prime ports of Bangladesh like other coastal river ports, operating
the activities tuning with the ides.

8, During full moon. tidal surge can submerge boats, ships and might be the cause
of the loss of lrves and properties.

Marine resources of the Bay of Bengal

The 716 kilometres long coastal region of Bangladesh along the Bay of Bengal is
fullof marine resources. It has 442 near shore fish species, 336 species of Mollusks,
19 species of prawn, crabs, mangrove forest including other marine vegetations.
Nuclear minerals like Zircon, Monazite, [lmenite, Magnetite, Reolite and Leucoxene
have been found in the coastal zones of Cox's Bazar.

Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. What is iceberg?
a. Frozen ice of Antarctica b. Frozen ice of Greenland
c. Large ice mass floats with the ocean current d. Frozen ice of Himalayas

2025
Hydrosphere 105

2. The depth of oceans related to —
i, temperature.
ii, ocean current.
ui. salinity.
Which one of the following is correct?
a, jand ii b.  iand tii
c. tand iit d. i, i and ut

Observe the map below and answer the questions 3 and 4:

3. Why ocean ships cannot move through the region marked as ‘P’?
a. For the depth of the ocean b. For steeper coastline
ec. For warm current d. For the power of ships

4. The merging of ‘Q' and ‘R’ currents produce —

i. fog.
ii. icecaps.
ii. iceberg,

Which one of the following is correct?
a. Land ii b.  iand ili
ce. land ili d. i, Hand ili

Forma-|4, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
106

Geography and Environment

Creative questions

b,

Cold Curent ——
Warm Current = —=F

What is deepest ocean trench?

Explain the importance of continental slope.

Discuss how the flow of water of the area marked as ‘A’ will influence the
surrounding land mass?

Discuss the influence on trade if the water volume does not circulate in the
ateas marked as ‘TP’ and ‘B’.

Tuhin has gone to the sea-beach of Cox's Bazar for pleasure. One morning he

observed that the ocean water expanded and raised but gone down al evening.

a.

b.

What is the cause of Ocean current?

Explain the influence of centrifugal force for the creation of low and high tide.

Explain the causes of this type of water movement mentioned im the clue.

Analyze how the water movement seen by Tuhin will influence the coastal

areas?

2025
2025

Chapter Seven

Population

The world’s population is growing very rapidly. This is because the number of babies
born each year is greatly exceeding the number of people who are dying. This is
ihe result of improved health care system, medicine, nutritious food, improved
water and sanitation education and many life saving vaccinations. It has also increased
the longevity of the people and decreased infant mortality rates throughoul the
world. Population growth rate inthe developed countries has decreased substantially
whereas in the developing countries it is still high. As aresull, the population of the
world is growing at a fast rate.

This rapid growth has been called “a population explosion’. However, this explosion
is not evenly distributed, as 97 percent of the increase takes place in the three
developing continents of Africa, Asia and Latin America. Natural, economic, political
and geographical factors make different regions of the world into high density and
low density population areas. The following diagram shows the population density of
different regions.

World
Population

‘eo een

N { —y -
xe ‘ (fila) High density > iH
= ~" [= Low density “

Density of the world population
At the end of this chapter. we will be able to-
« explain the world population at present and its changing pattern;
e factors related to the change of population;
*® explain factors, merits and dements of migration;
® gather knowledge about the ments and demerits of migration and provide
information to others about its;
108 Geography and Environment

« explain the relationship between rate of population and the natural resources;
* explain the density and distribution of population;

* discuss the factors of density and distribution of population;

* explain the growth of population of Bangladesh, ils problems and its solution;
* provide solution to reduce the population growth.

Current population status and Changing Pattern

From the beginning of the Chnstian era till 1500 A.D. the world population increased
very slowly and later increased gradually, Change of population through time is

known as natural mcrease.

According to UN Convention, countries of the world has to conduct national census
im every ten years. The modern census was first introduced in 1655 and gradually
majority of the countries of the world have conducted national census. In 1650 total
population of the world was 500 million, in 1850 it increased to 1.2 billion. After
industrial revolution in the 1850’s development of industries and improvement of
agriculture led to the growth of population. Within one hundred years the population
was double. In 1950 total population of the world was 2.53 billion which now
increases to 7.60 billion in 2017. If this rate of increase continues, by 2030 the estimated

population will be more than 8.60 billion (fig. 7.1).

World Population Change 1
Year | Population growth B :
rate (Billion) z= 4
1950 2.53 § :
1960 3.03 qs
1970 | 3.69 ae
1980 4.45 = 3
1990 5.32 & 2
2000 | 6.13 | '
aus | cee ‘ 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2017
2017 | 7.60 po oi

Source : UN, Dept. of Economic and Social Fig. 7. : World Population growth trend 1950-2017
Affairs, Population Division. 2017
2025

Population 109

From the table and figure given above the population growth trend can be
classified into three phases.

Initial stage : From the earliest times till 1650 A.D. is known as the initial stage. At

ihis time total world population increase rate was very low, because both death
rate and birth rate were very high,

Middle stage : The period between 1650 A.D. and 1950 A.D. is known as the middle
stage of population growth. In the middle stage death rate declined but birth rate
was high which resulted in very rapid increase of population. In Africa, Asia and
South America population growth rate was low as the birth and death rate
were very high. At the begining of this stage population growth was slow but at the
end, it grow rapidly.

Recent stage : After 1950-2020 is the recent stage. In the last few decades the

population has increased rapidly in the world, but on the basis of region two trends
have been found.

Recent stage of population growth

4
| ’

Developed region Developing region

Developed region or Developed countries : In this region population is stable as
population growth decreased due to low birth and death rate, Displayed population
structure shows that the base of the structure is narrow, middle part is wide and the
top is narrow (fig. 7.2). In developed region male/female population growth is nearly
the same and dependent population is less than that. Number of active population is
high and so the work force is high. Generally, population in the age group of 0-18 years
and over 65 years are considered dependent population. The rest are known as active
population.
110

Geography and Environment

Developed Countries Developing Countries

Year

B+

80 ~ Be

75-79

G5 - 69

6-64

§5 - 59

Male Female sii. 4 Female

45.49

40 - 4a

35-39

30-34

25-29

20-2

19-19

10-14 !
¥-9

I T T T o-4 T T al i
200 190 it 1 200 300 0b 200 100 0 100 i
Population (Millions) Population (Millions)
Fig. 7.2: Population structure
Developing negro oF Population structure Age specific
Developing countries : In

developing country of the world,
population growth rate is still
very high. In the last few decades
in the developing world the
death rate decreased but the
birth rate did not decrease as
such. The population structure

male/female distribution shown in a triangular
shape graph is known as population structure.
The lett side of the vertical axis shows the male
population and right side shows the female
population. Graph that shows the population
structure is known as population pyramid.

of these countries has a very wide base and a narrow top (fig. 7.2).

The number of children and aged population is very high in the total population
andas a result the size of the dependent population is high. Active population ts
relatively low and so those countries economies are poor.

Task : Write down the characteristics of population growth in the given table.

Initial stage

Middle stage Recent stage

2025
2025

Population 111

Factors of population change

If you observe in your family or in the neighbourhood you will see that in the last
few years some changes in the number of population has taken place. For example.
some babies were born (birth), some died (death) and some went te other places
due to job or marriage (migration).

‘he three factors of population change birth, death and migration are known as
population dynamics. Population is a very dynamic factor. Birth. death and migration
change population structure of a country which eventually has an impact on

society and economy.

Birth rate

The birth rate in the number of live babies born in a year for every LODO people in
ihe total] population. Child bearing capacity/fertility of women ranges between 15-45 or 15-49
years of age.

Number of children born in a particular year

i = x
Bie Number of fertile women in a particular year 1000

Crude Birth rate

But crude birth rate is a more acceptable method. It is calculated by following formula.

Total number of children born in a year

: i = x
Crude birth rate Wind year total population 1000

Fertility of population differs from region to region in the world, Countries have
different types of birth rate, Usually socio-economic condition is the main factor.
Factors responsible for birth rate are_given below ;

1. Marital characteristics : Age of marnage, polygamy and divorce have influence
on birth rate.

2. Education : General education decreases the fertility and lilliterary increases it

3. Profession : People like doctors, engineers, administrators and managers have low

birth rate. On the other hand farmers have high fertility rates.
112 Geography and Environment

4. Rural-urban residence : In rural areas birth rate is high and in urban area it is
low,

Birth rate variation is a social matter. Society, societal status, geographical
location, economic status, marriage, religious sentiment, education, culture are related
to fertility and the birth rate.

Mortality : The death rate is the number of people in every 1000 who die each year.

Death rate

Crude death rate : The formula of CDR is given below :

Total number of deaths per year
CDR = : : * 1000
Mid year total population

Death rate is influenced by the following reasons :

1. Natural disaster : Storm, earthquake, flood, famine are the causes of unnatural
death.

2. War and social violence : War, social violence and riots increase death rate.
Afghanistan, Traq and people of Palestine have lugher death rates.

3. Disease and accidents : Epidemic, accidents increase death rate.

Death rate also varies from country to country. Developing nations have higher death
tate, but it is low in developed countnes. Death rate also vanes from gender to
gender. Usually women in child bearmg age have higher mortality rates in the
developing countries. The developing countries also suffer from high infant mortality
Tates.

Migration

Migration is the movement of people from one place to another to live or to
work. Sometimes this movement may only be to the next town or only for a short
period of time. Sometimes the movement may be to a different country and the
move can be permanent. Migration can be classified into two on the basis of
its nature- voluntary and forced migration. Migration are of two types depending on
the destination international and imternal. People who migrate are known as migrants.

2025
Population 113

1. Voluntary migration : Voluntary migration is when people choose to move.
This is usually because of the ‘pull’ or attraction of a better quality of life elsewhere,
or of a higher standard of living or greater personal freedom.

2. Forced migration : Forced migration is when people have no choice and are
made to move. They can be ‘pushed’ out of a place because of natural disasters or to
avoid religious and political persecutions. Those people who are forced to migrate
and settle somewhere permanently are known as refugee and those forced migrants

wail to retumm to ther home country after sometime is known as emigre.

Task : Ring Bhowmie’s family. Sadia’s family, Shohag. Robin and many more
went to India in 1971 during the libaration war of Bangladesh. In 1972 Sadia’s
family, Shohag and Robin came back, Now fill in the table below :

1. What type of migration is it?
2. Who are the refugees?
3, Who are the emigre?

4, Who are the migrant?

You will observe that migration is being occured within the terretory of the country
rural to urban or urban to rural. Again, you will see that some people have migrated out
of the country to another country. So, according to spatial view migration can be
divided into two classes.

1. Internal
2. International

Task : Fill up the table (individual work).

Place of migration Type of migration

Dhaka to Chittagong
Dhaka to USA

Mymensingh to Dhaka

Borra to Dhaka

Forma-| 5, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
114 Geography and Environment

Factors of migration

Pull factors : Better job opportunity, better education, high standard of living etc.
are the pull factors for migration from the place of orgin.

Push factors : Natural disaster, unemployment, religious persecution etc. are the
push factors for migration from the place of origin.

Some of the pull and push factors are given below ;

Pull factors

. To live close to relatives and kin.

1
2, Employment opportunity and better economic prospect.
3, Education, health, housing and social security benefit.
4, Demand of skilled manpower in the market.

5. Personal benefit to get property from marriage.

Push factors

1. Natural disaster related destruction.

ba

Population growth related problem.
Social and ethnic problem.

Economic recession.

a Se

Loss in Business and trade.

Merits and demerits of migration

When educated people voluntarily migrate for better quality of life or personal
freedom the home country losses a good citizen who could contribute to the
country’s economy and development. When a less educated, unskilled or skilled
labour migrates he earns more than he earned in his own country. He can save money
and send that back to his family. The family members have a better quality life than
before. Labour class people bring in money for the country but the educated ones take
away the education and money which he gamed from the country. So, less educated
temporary migrants are better citizens for the country.

Migration is important in the distribution of world population. Apart from location
change, due to migration different regions have economic, societal and population

2025
2025

Population 115

change which is discussed below :

1. Economic impact : People migrate for economic benefit. In the place of
origin and destination property ownership, labour wages, unemployment, living
standard, balance in trade, economic production and development may change. Ifa
less literate person does not migrate in proper way he may face economic loss. In
the case of ternational migration people should have proper information about
the destination. Information passed on from other people may not be authentic and
migrants may face problem in destination and lead to deportation from foreign
countries. In the home country the emigrant may have taken loan to go abroad but
due to deportation he has to come back without earning which leads to more loss to
the country and to the individual also.

2. Social impact : Exchange of social behaviour and pattern takes place for migration.
Many types of disease are also spread by migration. Exchange of ideas, views with
various types of people and the migrants takes place, Migrants accept new culture
and way of life which eventually leads to identity crisis of the migrants.

3. Impact on population : Due to migration population decreases in the place of
origin and increases in the place of destination. Educated young, and prolessional
people’s migration to the destination bring changes to the population structure. ‘This
leads to the imbalance of male female rates. Sometimes educated young migrants do
not return to the home country which isa loss for the country. Many countries have
low population so they iniport manpower to utilize their resources properly. These
countries are Saudi Arabia, Malaysia and the United Arab Emirates. Developing countries
send human resources to the labour market and earn foreign exchange.

Government policy on population : In 2012, a national policy was adopted
for the improvement of health, family welfare, and better lvelihood of mothers
and children, For making small size family, population control, family planning
programme were taken into consideration for the overall success of social and
national development.

Population density and distribution
Population density : Population density is the number of people who live in a given
area. It is calculated for a particular country, using the equation.

Number of people in a particular country
Size of that country (kim?)

Population density =
116

Total population of Bangladesh is
14,97,72,364 and size of the country
1,47,570 km? .

14.97,72,364

‘RORY Se 3a

per km?.

=1,015 persons

If the size of the country is large in
relation to population the density of
population may be lower (fig. 7.3).

Man-land ratio : Arable land divided
by the size of population is called
man-land ratio. Formula of man-land
ratio is:

Total population

Mancland ratio =: Te land

Optimum population : A country’s

balance between total population and man-land ratio is known as the optimum

population. As long as the natural resourees and production of a country can
support a certain number of population it is the optimum population for that period,

When the balance of man-land ratio of a country is unstable it results in over

population or under population.

Over population : When the land resources of a country is relatively low and the

Geography and Environment

Population densiry (persons/inbomrtres |
——

23 100 256 500 1000

Fig. 7.3 : Population density of Bangladesh

population size is high that is called over population.

Under population : When the land resources of a country is respectively high

and population size is low that is called under population.

Population distribution : Population distribution refers to the arrangement, spread

and density of people in an area.

2025
A
=
a

Population 117

Factors of population density and distribution

Population is not evenly distributed all over the country. There are some natural,
social and economic reasons for the uneven distribution of population in a
country. Factors that influence the distribution of population are divided into two :

these are physical factors, non- physical factors.

Physical factors

Physical features : People are naturally attracted to flat low bying lands where
soils are fertile, water supply is plentiful and transport linking to other places
is good, Relief discourages settlement especially in areas which have high
mountains. Dense tropical tain forest have few permanent settlements. In
Chittagong Hill Tracts and Sunderbans area density of population is very low.

Climate : People are discouraged to settle down in areas of extreme climate which
are very cold, very hot or very wet. People prefer to live in mild climate areas.

Soil: Fertile soil is good for agriculture so people are attracted to areas near the river
where plains exist,

Water : Sweet drinking water attracts people. Places along the river is good for
selllement and agriculture which is the reason for high density along the river.

Mineral ; Mineral resources also encourage people to settle there,

Non-physical factors

Society : Where Employment, housing, food, clothing is easily available density
of population is high.

Cultural factor : Education and culture inspire people nowadays to migrate. People
wants to settle where opportunity of education and research facilities are more.
Economic factor : Industrial area where employment opportunity is higher and those

areas where there are economically better off. people tend to concentrate on those
places. Such as Osaka im Japan, Mumbai in India are those places were density of

population is high.
Impact of excessive population pressure on natural resources

Increasing population raises pressure on land, When the population of a country
increases in a limited area, more food is needed, For higher population more land is
used for food. Land fragmentation and overuse of land are leading to the decrease of
productive lands. Increase of settlement is decreasing open space and water bodies.
118 Geography and Environment

Micro-soil nutrients are destroyed. Vegetation does not grow in polluted soil
which leads to desertification, So, proper land utilization is necessary to keep a

balance between population increase and land resources.

A diagram showing the impact of over population on land resources

—> Higher crop cultivation — Fertility decrease + Decrease of organism |

_—> Higher fertilizer for higher production — Pesticide use + Soil pollution

| Deforestation and hill cutting for agriculture Land exposure for erosion |

+—>| Fragmentation of agricultural land —+ Land used for settlement |

| Land division + Establishment of infrastructure and business centres |

—» Transport — Increasing land use for office and administrative purpose |

Water is essential for human survival. Population increase also affecis the water
resources. Over use of sweet water and its impact is shown below :

»| Use of water in agriculture for irrigation is depleting the
underground water level.
| Overuse of sweet water for drinking is depleting the
underground water level which is harmful.
ater

—>| Water transport is polluting the water by oil spill and waste. |

-—>j Industrial waste as dye, grease and other chentical substance. |

Due to the above mentioned resources marine plants, micro organism and plankton
cannot survive and the food chain of small and big fishes is broken and so the
marine life is decreasing gradually,

Environmental balance is decreasing due to increase of human setilement,
industrial production, hill cutting and deforestation.

Task : Make a chart of your surrounding area by observing the land use.water and forest.

2025
2025

Population 119

Balance between resources and population is very important for a country’s
development. Population and resources are the two factors for national development.
So, population policy is made for proper utilization of resources for the development
of a country.

Current Population of Bangladesh problems and solutions

Bangladesh is one of the densely populated country. According to Bangladesh Bureau
of Statistics (BBS), 2019, total population of Bangladesh is 16 crore 55 lacs 70
thousand. Density of population is 1,116 persons per square kilometres. If the present
growth rate continues density of population will increase in future. Population
characteristics of Bangladesh are given below :

Population characteristics of Bangladesh

* Population is increasing but growth rate decreased.

« Population is high in comparison to land area,

* Number of Male/Female is same.

* Half of the population is dependent.

* Death rate declined more than birth rate.

* Majority of the population live in mural areas.

® Average longevity is less than developed countries.

Population growth rate : Population of Bangladesh is increasing rapidly. In
199] population growth rate was 2.17 percent, in 2001 1.48 percent and in 2011 it was
1,37 percent. A graph showing the growth rate of population is given below :

Bangladesh Population growth rate Task
Year | Yearly growth rate in percentage 2 | 30
1981 2.31 ea 25
|
1991] a17 Z 2.0
3001 148 @ [15
2009 13 8 | 10
2011 1.37 E = _
0 ashe) ol ao
RR) S/S) 5
—» Years

120

Geography and Environment

Population distribution according to age group

Population characteristic of Bangladesh is greater youthful population. Census
records m different years show that the number of dependent population is
high i.e., children, adolescent and aged population. Population structure of 2005
shows that in the aged population group between 60-90 years is less than 1.5
million and number of females is higher than males. Using the structure complete
ihe task below :

BS +
40 -
BS -
BO -
Ta

60
$5
50

ip

Age Grou

25

i5-
10 -
5
o-

45
40-
34 -
30-
- 24
20-

Population structure 2005

$4
i)
£4
74
4
64
59
54
49
44
3a
a4

24

ig
14
9
4

|

T T T T
10.000 6.000 86.000 4000 2000 0 2.000 4.000 6.000 68000 10.000

Male (Millions) Female
<—_— Population —————>»

Task: 1.

2.

3,

Which age group has the highest population?
Which age group is active?

Find out the rate of active and dependent population.

2025
Population 12]

Population problem of Bangladesh
In any country, land and natural resource is limited. Population of Bangladesh is

inereasing rapidly. However, directly and indirectly population pressure is acting on
land and resources.

® Fragmentation of land = Decrease Production

® Demand for housing, increasing use of land = Decrease of agricultural land

® Decrease of per capita Income = Low standard of living

* Rapid population increase, less food production = Food shortage

® High population = Poor health care facilities

* Population increase = Health care facilities is less

* Deforestation, Will cutting, Slum increase = Environmental pollution

« Low per capila income=low savings, low investment leads to unemployment =
Unemployment increase

« Increase of food import = Decrease of foreign exchange

« Degradation. of social values, increase of stealing, mugging for survival = Loss of
security im social life

« Too many students in classes due to fewer schools, admission problem, harmful
educational environment = low literacy rate

Solution of population problem of Bangladesh may lead to economic
development. Modemization of agriculture, industrialization, development of transport
and communication can speed up the economic development of the country.
Population can be moved from high density area to low density area to solve the
population problem. Extension of education and family planning can decrease the

population growth,

Even distribution of national income may increase the standard of hving. Slalled
manpower development may decrease population growth. Agriculture, industry,
business development May increase the per capita income which may reduce the

population to some extent but solving population problem is not easy.

Forma-16, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
122 Geography and Environment

Task : Fill in the diagram by using information above,

Economic Development

\ !

Solving the Population
| Problem of Bangladesh

LN

Measures taken to control population in Bangladesh

Population is one of the major problems of Bangladesh. Government has taken many
family planning programmes. Non-Government organizations are also trying to
increase the awareness of the bad effects of too much population. A joint effort may

lead the population irora burden to human resource. Some of the measures to control

population are :

* Tnerease the age of marriage of the girls/women.

* Build awareness in the population to keep the family size small for better future.
* Create more jobs for women and encourage education of women.

* Provide social security benefit during old age.

* To apply family planning programmes to limit number of children.

* Make recreational facilities for the citizens of the country.

* Removing fanaticism, dependency on son, and the linkage of the family.

Exercise

Multiple choice questions

1. Which is the non-physical factor of population distribution?
a, Economic b. Mineral

ce. Soil d. Water

2025
2025

Population 123

2. Which contribution makes an optimum population?
a. Man-forest resource balance b. Man-land balance

c. Man-mineral resource balance d.  Man-industry balance

Answer questions 3 and 4 from the figure below :

& Bo a ar" D2

a

ar

3. The cause of migration from *Q’ marked region to ‘R’ marked region in the

map-

i, lack of employment opportunity.

ik. river erosion.

iu. social and religious discrimination.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iandii b. Land iit

c. iiand iii ad. i,iiand il
124

Geography and Environment

The cause of the density of population being low in ‘P* marked region in the
map-

i. undeveloped land.
i. undeveloped transport.

ii. undeveloped agriculture.

Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iit

ec. itand iti d. i, it and iti

Creative questions

Recently in neighbouring country of Myanmar the Buddhist community and the
minority Muslim Rohinga community bad a communal riot, Rohinga Muslims

had taken shelter in Ukhia in Cox's Bazar a in order to save their lives.

a. What is migration?
b. What do you understand by emigre? Explain.

c, What type of migration did the Rohingas have when they took shelter in
Ukhia in Cox’s Bazar? Explain.

d. What sort of negative impact on the environment will take place due to

Rehinga migration in that area? Give your explanation.

2025
2025

Population 125

a, What is crude birth rate?

b. What do you understand by over population? Explain.

c. Explain the physical reason of high population density in “P’ marked region of
the map.

d. Analyze the difference of density of population at ‘Q’ and ‘R* marked region of
the map.
