CHAPTER EIGHT
Management of Business Organization

There is a correlation between the development of management and the
evolution of the civilization. Initially, management was based on family and
group. The concept of management spread over all spheres of life with the
progression of civilization. The concept of management got huge popularity
from the business operating method of the businessmen. Generally, Management
is the process of making others to do necessary jobs to achieve a certain
objective. In this chapter, we will learn about the concept of management,
activities and various elements of management in an organization.

After reading this chapter, we will be able to —
« Explain the management concept and activities.
# Describe the concept and necessity of planning.
e Explain the concept and importance of organizing,
* Describe the concept of leadership and its types
* Identify the quality of a good leader
¢ Describe the concept and sources of financing of a business

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10), Forma-14
106 Business Entrepreneurship

Concept of Management

Mr. Rahman has been operating a business of fabrics for five years. All kinds of
fabrics and readymade garments are available in his shop. Many buyers come to
his shop every day. Me has been operating the business alone, He started to think
about appomting a staff with the expansion of the busmess. Recently, he has
recruited a staff. As a result, he was relieved a little bit from the work load. But,
after some days, the customers of the shop brought charges against the staff for
opening the shop late and complained about his misbehavior. Mr. Rahman
listened to his customers attentively and advised the staff to protect the goodwill
of the business. The staff realized his fault. He got motivated to work more
attentively in future.

In the above mentioned story. thinking of appointing staff, recruitment of the
staff, giving attention to the customers objection against the stalf and taking
measures accordingly, all these activities of Mr. Rahman are the part of his
business management.

Management is the efficiency and strategy of doing things by utilizing others
potential, According to Henry Fayol who is known as the father of the modern
management "Management is the combination of forecasting and planning,
organizing, commanding, coordinating and controlling.” Some features of
management are:

* Management is a systematic process of some tasks.
« Management is operated to achieve a predefined goal.
* Management is a process based on team
« Management is a continuous process. It is necessary to take new strategy
of management with the passage of time.
Functions of Management

All the activities performed to achieve a predefined goal is known as manage-
ment. Many activities have to be performed under management to achieve the
defined target through operating the human resources and other elements of
business. The functions of management are descried below:

], Planning: Planning is the guideline for future work process. Planning is the
process to specify that what jobs to be done, who will do them, when and
how it is to be done in future to accomplish the predefined goal of the
business organization. Planning is the first job of management.

20235
2025

Management of Business Organization 107

2.

fad

Organizing: Organizing is known as the process of accumulation of
human resources and other elements of the business for proper utilization
and distribution of power and responsibilities among the workers and
building interpersonal relationship among them.

Staffing: Major element of an organization is its work force. It is termed
as the human resources of the company. Staffing includes collection of
worker, selection. recruitment and training, promotion, transfer and lay

off.

Directing: Direction is called to commanding the workers to implement
the plan. The manager gives order to the worker about when, what and
how to do a job. Workers can show most efficiency if the direction is
appropriate. That is why many has compared direction with leadership

Motivation: Motivation is the process of making the worker attracted
and encouraged towards the job of the organization, Because of
motivation, the workers become responsible and perform with quality,

Coordinating: Coordination means effective communication between
the workers of the organization, various divisions and departments.
Through coordination all the workers form a team which help them to
perform with unity.

Controlling: Controlling refers to the activities related to looking after
whether the works are done according to the plan, finding variances if
any, and taking corrective measures if necessary. Controlling makes the
implementation of planning easier.

Due to effective and corrective measures of controlling business
organizations lead to development overcoming internal and external
barriers and obstacles. However, it can be ensured through controlling
whether the appropriate work is being done in appropriate way and time.

Concept of Planning:

The teacher of Business Entrepreneurship, Mr, Kohinur entered the class and
exchanged greetings. The students also welcomed him spontaneously. He
wanted to know about the experience of visiting a factory before starting the
discussion of classification of industry.

He found that most of the students do not have any practical experience of
visiting a factery. All the students become overwhelmed with joy when they
heard about his intention of visiting the BSCIC industrial area of the district. He
108 Business Entrepreneurship

made everybody calm down and said that they need to take permission from the
Head Master. Besides, some more things are to be ensured:

When to go.

® How to go.

* How many teachers and students shall accompany.

® How to contact the authority of the visiting company.

At last he asked the students: What can it be called to forecast or thinking to visit
the factory? The studentsreplied in chorus: Planning. He thanked everybody. He
told them that the prior thinking or forecasting before starting a job is called
planning. To say more vividly Business planning is the advance decision making
process of what to do, when to do, where to do and within how much time to
spend about implementing a particular job. Correct planning helps to achieve
target easily. With the help of planning, proper utilization of assets and elements
of the organization is ensured. Duties and responsibilities can be distributed
among the workers appropriately through planning. As a result, they become
responsible and efficient.

Activity-l: Why is it necessary to have a planning for a business
organization?

Concept and Importance of Organizing

Mr. Proshanto Das, the owner of the 'Ashar Bani General Store! has been doing
business in his locality with reputation for long. He has accumulated various
products like readymade garments, cosmetics, baby foods and toys from Dhaka
and Chattogram. But, the most lucrative thing in his business is the various kinds
of pickle made by himself. Every year he buys Mango (aam), Hog Plum
(ambra), Jujube (borui), Olive (Jolpai), and Amla (amloki) from the local market
to make the pickle and sell them. For this reason, seasonally he appoints some
women to help him to make and bottle the pickle in exchange of fixed salary. His
pickle gets reputed day by day. He decided to open a separate division to make
and sell the pickle. He permanently appointed the women who were temporarily

£023
2025

Management of Business Organization 109

helping him to make pickle, A person was appointed as manager. He distributed
the responsibility of collecting raw materials. making and preserving the pickle
all the year round,

All the jobs done by Mr. Proshato Das is the part of management of the business.
These works are called organizing.

As per planning Mr. Proshanto has accumulated and coordinated the human
resources and other elements of the business for proper utilization and has
distributed jobs among the workers with duties and responsibilities. Organizing
helps a company to achieve the objectives in an easy way. Proper utilization of
the assets of the company is ensured. Controlling and operating the workers and
employees working in the organization becomes easier. The velocity of work
increases with the help of strong interpersonal relationship.

Activity — 2: Significance of organizing a business firm

Concept of Leadership

Mr. Arshad started his business M/s. Akhitara Furnitures with a small capital.
But, his hard work, honesty and efficiency to direct the workers and eagerness to
be success{ul in business has made him a special person in the society. Now, five
branches of his business are running with reputation. He listens to the workers
demand and complains attentively and tries his best to solve their request. On the
other hand, the workers are also working in the organization with sense of
belonging, always trying to increase the goodwill of the business by fulfilling the
demand of the customers.
From the above story we find the following qualities of Mr. Arshad:

e He is industrious

* He is honest

¢ Heis efficient to direct the workers

* He has strong inclination for the development of the business.
110

Business Entrepreneurship

* He ts cordial to listen to workers demand and objections and positive

to solve the problems.

All the above mentioned qualities of Mr. Arshad can be called the quality of
leadership. In case of business, leadership means the quality and strategy to
encourage workers to perform jobs to achieve some particular goal.

Clasification of Leadership

SL No.

Nature of
Leadership

Features/Characteristics

Democratic
Leadership

Leader consults with the subordinates

Take advise from the subordinates

Collects information from the workers

Gives the workers opportunity to ask question
Answers them

Expects accountability

Accountable to the worker

Workers feel them to be a part of the
organization.

Autocratic
Leadership

The leader only gives order, there is no
accountability

Relies solely on his own power and capability
Can not rely on the ability of the workers
Never takes the opinion or advise of the
workers

Keeps negative mentality about the workers
Keeps workers always under pressure
Workers never take ownership responsibility
of the business,

Laissez Faire
Leadership

Leader remains tension free after assigning
responsibilities to the subordinates.

Leader does not like to work by himself

Do not give particular order to the workers.
Workers do not have the accountability
Workers can work of their own will.

Takes more time in decision making

The success of the organization depends upon
the good interpersonal relationship and team
work

2025
2025

Management of Business Organization at

4. Bureaucratic * Leader orders the worker to get the work

Leadership done.

e Workers give priority to the ideology than
the leader and are bound to follow them

* All the time workers have to follow the rules

* Order of the leader is more important than the
leader himself and discipline than personal
relationship is more important.

Activity -3: Complete the following chart by analyzing the different
types of leadership

Types of Leadership Advantages Disadvantages
Democratic Leadership ‘ z
. *
* *
1 i]
Autocratic Leadership ‘i a
. ]
. o
* *
Laissez Faire ‘ ‘
Leadership . .
. =
* *
Bureaucratic Leadership ‘ .
oS i]
* *
i]

Qualities of Ideal Leaders

He who leads ts the leader. The task of the leader is to encourage and motivate
the workers of the organization to achieve the defined goal of the business. A
leader must have some qualities or characteristics to perform the serious task of
a leader. Because, the good quality of a competent leader can make the success
of the company casier, and in a similar way their incompetency can fail the
organization. The qualities of an ideal leader are analyzed below:
112

‘ae

10.

Business Entrepreneurship

Physical capacity and soundness: A leader has to take physical and
mental pressure and perform physical labor. For this reason, his physical
capability is important as well as his mental and physical soundness.
Besides, his physical structure should also be attractive.

Keen Personality: The leader should be calm quiet im nature. The
subordinates honor a leader having decent attitude and attractiveness.

Education and Experience: Formal education helps a man to achieve
many positive knowledge, efficiency and view. Besides, experience makes
them enriched. So it is expected that a leader should be educated and
experienced.

Courage and Honesty: Leader has to always lead from the front. He has
to perform a lot of challenging and risky job. He has to be courageous just
and honest. Because, he cams the trust and honor of others with his honesty
and courage.

Hard working and flexibility: Hard work is the key to performing any job
well. A leader has to work hard to carry out his responsibility. If, the leader
is lazy, does not do work and becomes tired, then it becomes difficult to
direct the subordinates. Besides, if he does not have flexibility, it will be
difficult for him to lead.

Responsibility and Cooperation: Leader's sense of responsibility works
as a motivating factor for the workers. On the other hand, cooperative
mentality to all makes it easier to achieve the goal of the company easily.
Organizing Efficiency: A leader must have efficiency in all aspects of the
organization so that he can find the right people for the right job.
Realizing human resources relation: A successful leader must have the
quality to realize the expectations, qualification, personality, taste, point of
view of the subordinates. Effective and long rin results cannot be expected
if leading is not done considering the mentality of the subordinates.

Power to take decision: Success of the organization depends upon taking
the right decision at right times. Leader has to take decision on the basis of
his wisdom and far sight. Decision taken by the leader increases the
reliability and mental strength of the subordinates,

Gender Awareness: A leader is always compassionate and shows honor to
the subordinates whether they are men or women. He must be neutral. He
has to lead considering the different mentality of men and women and their
social status.

2025
Management of Business Organization 13

Activity -4: Through Self analysis, try to find out what qualities of a leader
do you have and which one needs to be improved.

Qualities of a Good Leader Yes No

e Physical capability and soundness

e Keen Personality

* Education and experience

e Courage and honesty

« Hard working and flexible

« Responsibility and Cooperation

e Organizing Capacity

« Realizing human resources relations

* Power to take decisions

« Gender Awareness

Concept of Finance in Business

Samir Chakma of Rangamati wasted a year in searching for a job. Many of his
friends are still studying, some of them have been engaged in job or business. At
last, he decided to start a business. He has his own shop near the government
school at Upazila. He is interested to start a stationary business in the shop. His
parents became very happy at his decisions. But, they were thinking about
arrangement of capital. At last, to start the business, he arranged taka 1.00 lac
from his father and taka fifty thousand from his aunty. His uncle from abroad
agreed to pay taka one lac. His father advised him to be careful in using the
money. He was also informed that it is possible to take loan from a commercial
bank. In the above story, to operate the business of Samir Chakma, planning,
sourcing, collection and utilization of fund, al these activities are known as
Finance.

Generally, Finance means collecting funds for business. But, in broader sense,
Business finance is all the activities related to meet up the required fund for
business through collection, preservation and proper utilization of fund.

Business Entrepreneurship. Class 9-10, Forma-15
1i4

Business Entrepreneurship

Sources of Finance

Fund or capital is necessary for any type of business. This fund is necessary to
start the business, maintaining the business, running and expanding the business.
There are opportunities to collect fund from different sources. These are
discussed below-

I;

Own Source: Small business like sole proprietorship or partnership
business the owner arranges the required fund to start the business from
his own source.

Relatives: If the fund from the own source of the owner is not
sufficient, he may borrow from relatives. friends and other well
wishers.

Commercial Bank: All the government and non government
commercial banks including Sonali Bank, Janata Bank, Rupali Bank,
Agrani Bank extend short term, mid term and long term loan to the
business people. Normally, the commercial banks are the main source
for financing the business.

Co-operative Bank: Co-operative Banks extend short term loan to its
members. It also extends loan to non members as well.

Grameen Bank: Grameen Bank extend short term loan to set up small
size business.

Krishi Bank: Bangladesh Krishi Bank and Rajshahi Knshi Unnayan
Bank extend short term and long term loan for the development of
small and medium size enterprise.

Bangladesh Development Bank Ltd.; This bank provides short term,
mid term, and long term loan for industrial development of ihe country.
Bank of Small Industries & Commerce: This bank is the long term
source for fund for the small business and industries. It is known as the
Basic Bank Limited.

Non-government Development Organization: There are a number of
non government organizations who provide loan to the small business
against interest.

20235
Management of Business Organization 115

Activity -5: Put tick mark on the organization having possibility to get
loan from and otherwise put cross mark

Sources of Fund

Sonali Bank

Avrani Bank

Janata Bank

Rupali Bank

Cooperative Bank

Grameen Bank

Krishi Bank

Bangladesh Development Bank

Bank of Small Industries & Commerce
Non government Organization (NGO)

EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)

1, How many types of leadership are there?
a. 2 b:3
c. 4 d.5

2, Management is -
a. Strategy to influence the customer to buy product
b. Transferring the products from the manufacturer to the consumer
c. A strategy to make others do things.
d. Taking steps to justify the demand for a product in the market

After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3 & 4:

Mr. Tasnim took some advance decisions before starting "Dhanshin
Departmental Store". Such as; where to set it, who will operate it and how to
source the capital. As a result, it saved him time in different tasks. At present, he
is running the business with reputation,

3. Which of the following is similar to the task of Mr. Tasnim before starting
his “Dhanshiri Departmental Store”?

a. Planning b. Market Demand

c. Selecting the Project d. Organizing
116 Business Entrepreneurship

4. The step of Mr. Tasnim to set up the business-
i, will be helpful to achieve goal
il. will assist to increase the efficiency at work
iii, will reflect the personal willingness
Which one of the following is correct?
aid ii b. i & iii
c. i & ili d. i, i) & iii

Creative Question

1. Hashi-Khushi Nakshi Ghar" is a reputed organization in Jamalpur. Its owner
Mr.Mahin is very careful to collect materials for the business. Give advice to
the workers if necessary. To maintain success in the long run, he recruits
worker and arranges training for them considermg the importance of
efficient worker for making Nakshi katha and other items.

a. Who is the father of the modern management?

b. What do you understand by motivation? Explain.

¢. Describe the task of Mr. Mahin in the paragraph.

d. Analyze the reasons for “Hash-Khushi Nakshi Ghar” becoming
reputed organization,

2. Yafi and Shafi are two friends. Their business is situated near to each other. To
operate the business, Yafi takes decision after consulting with the workers
and taking their opinion, But, Shafi imposes his decision on the workers and
are not aware of its influences. Shali's business failed because of worker
dissatisfaction.

a. What do you call the person who leads?

b. What do you understand by gender awareness? Explain

c. What type of leader is Mr. Yafi? Describe.

d. ‘The reason for Shafi’s failure is his incompetency in influencing the
worker’ — evaluate the statement.

£023
