Chapter 7
Money and Banking System

Nabil's father is a service holder. His monthly salary is 20000 taka. He keeps
some cash for household expenses and deposits some money to the bank. After
some days, he decides to set up a poultry farm. For this he takes some loan from
the bank. The bank sanctions this loan to him on condition of repaying it within
36 months at 10% interest. His income-expenditure, savings and loans- all are
generated by money. Money and loan business are operated by bank and
financial institutions. The bank receives the surplus money of the public as
deposits and sanctions this to debtors as loans. Different banks play significant
role in our agricultural development, industrialization, self-employment and
trade and commerce.

After studying this chapter, we will be able to-

* describe the idea and classification of money;

* explain the functions of money:

* describe the concept of a commercial bank and its main functions;

¢ illustrate the procedures of opening and operating a bank account;

« explain the concept of the central bank and its major functions;

* compare the central bank with commercial banks;

* evaluate the role of some important banks of Bangladesh in agricultural
development, industrialization and self-employment and

« show the banking system of Bangladesh by drawing charts,

2023
2025

Money and Banking System 93

7.1 Money and Its Classification

For a long time farmers used to collect their clothes from weavers in exchange
for crops and fishermen used to collect utensils from potters in exchange for
fishes. This system of fulfilling the necessities of certain goods in exchange for
other goods is called the Barter System. This system is still practiced in some
rural areas of our country. But this system created some problems sometimes
(e.g. problems in division of the goods and the dissimilarities in needs, etc). To
overcome these problems, money was invented. In modern economy money is
unanimously approved and accepted as the medium of exchange. Money
functions as a mode of exchange, a measure of the prices of services and goods,
and as a mode of savings.

So the object that is promoted by the government. generally accepted as a
measure of value, accepted everywhere as a medium of repayment of debt, and
granted by all as the mode of savings and basis of loan, is called money. It is
named differently in different countries, like Taka in Bangladesh, Rupee in
India, Dollar in America and Euro in most of the countries of Europe.

Classification of Money
Money can be classified from various points of view. It is discussed below:
According to the components of making, money can be classified in 2 types. like:

1) Metal coins and
2) Paper notes
Metal Coins

The coin which is made by
metals and used to conduct our
day-to-day transactions 1s called
a metal coin. In Bangladesh,
metal coins of 5 taka, 2 taka, | Metal Coins
taka and 50 paisa are available.

Metal coins can be classified into two groups based on material value. They are:
(a) authentic coin, (b) symbolic coin. An authentic coin is the metallic coin,
94 Economics

which can be sold at its visible price if sold as metal only after melting it.
Symbolic coin holds less value as metal than its visible value. Generally, metal
coins are introduced and authorized by the government.

Paper Notes or Money

The money which is made of paper is called paper notes or money. The value
written on the note is the monetary value of that note, which is generally higher
than its internal value. In almost all the countries, paper money or paper notes are
introduced by the central bank by the order of the government of that country.
The paper money of Bangladesh includes the notes of | taka, 2 taka, 5 taka, 10
taka, 20) taka, 50 taka, 100 taka, 200 taka, 500 taka and 1000 taka.

Paper money can be divided into two parts, as: (a) convertible money (b)
non-convertible money. Convertible money means the paper notes instead of
which the government is bound to give the local money of equal value on
demand. In Bangladesh, the notes of 5 taka, 10 taka, 20 taka, 50 taka, 100 taka,
500 taka, and 1000 taka are the convertible money. And non-convertible money
means the paper notes against which no foreign currency, gold, silver can be
received from the government. The non-convertible money in Bangladesh ts the
notes of 1 taka and 2 taka. Money can be divided again according to the
obligations of acceptance, such as: 1, Legal Money 2, Bank Account.

Legal Money

The money which is approved by the government law is called legal money. In
our country the legal money is formed of the metal coins and paper notes
authenticated by the government and the central bank. The legal money can be
divided into two parts: (a) unlimited legal money (b) limited legal money. The
unlimited legal money means the legal money by which any amount of
transaction can be made legally and ifit repays the debts and dues the creditor is
bound to receive it. The unlimited legal money of our country is the notes of 5
taka, 10 taka, 20 taka, 50 taka, 100 taka, 200 taka, 500 taka and 1000 taka. On the
other hand, limited legal money means the legal money which can be transacted
up to a certain limit. The public cannot be forced or compelled to receive more
money legally and public can receive it according to their wish. The limited legal
money of our country is the metallic coin of 50 paisa, | taka, 2 taka and 5 taka.

2025
2025

Money and Banking System 95

Bank Created Money

At present to repay the business transactions and
debts and dues. people receive bank account or
bank money as the medium of exchange. But no
one can be forced to receive it. Commercial bank
can create money by creating deposits or
sanctioning loans.

Transactions can be made through check against
the bank deposit or over draft. The bank deposit
or account may be considered as money. In our
country bank money is the deposit in current
account and deposit in savings account, which
¢an be received through cheque. Besides, debit
eard and credit card introduced by a bank work
as the medium of exchange.

Debit card & credit card

Task: Make a chart of the classification of money.

7.2 Functions of Money

Money plays different types of significant roles in the modern production system
and social lives.

While describing the fimctions of money, the poet says.
'The thing that measures exchange and value
Paying the loans and savings,
Everyone knows that Money it is'
(translated)

The following two lines of an English poem refers to the functions of money;

"Money is a matter of functions four;

A medium, a measure, a standard, a store."

This means that, money has four functions. Those are: medium of exchange,
measure of price, means of savings and standard of delayed or postponed
transaction.
96 Economics

Below is a description of the four major functions of money:

Medium of exchange

Transaction is done through exchange of money as money is acceptable to
everyone. A salesman takes money in exchange for things and a customer buys
things by paying money. In this way, by exchanging money anytime any product
or service can be purchased. For that reason transaction becomes easy and fast,
50, it can be said that money is the easiest and the most convenient medium of
exchange.

Measure of price

As a meter measures length and a kilogram measures weight, money is used as
the scale to measure the price of products and services. For example, Amir buys
a book for 50 taka. Here, 50 taka is the assessor of price of that book. Through
money, we can easily measure the price of a product and services and we can
also make comparisons between the former and then the upcoming price of a
product and services.

Means of saving

Saving cannot be built through products as most of the products are perishable.
But the price of these kinds of products and services can be stored by money
as everything can be exchanged through money. Nowadays people can save
their surplus after subtracting the consumption cost from the production wages
because savings through money is much more secure and comparatively stable.

Standard of delayed or postponed transaction

Delayed transaction refers to future dealings, The calculation of these dealings
is done through money. Moreover, taking and returning loans by money is more
appropriate. As a result, economic activities can be done without any hindrance.
At present, most of the business transactions are finanlised through cheques,
bank drafts, exchange bills, debentures, etc. The bank circulates these
debentures on the basis of the cash saved as a fixed deposit. Thus, money is
considered to be the basis of loans and the standard of delayed transaction.

20125
Money and Banking System oT

Apart from the above mentioned tasks, money also works as a price
transmission medium, standard of liquidity and a symbol of social status. These
roles of money are not different, rather one has arisen from another. Hence, it is
said that the economic development of the society has become easily accessible
because of the functions of money.

Task: Money has made our day-to-day life easier. Explain.

7.3 Commercial Bank

The bank that saves money from any individual or company as deposits and
provides loans to an individual or a company for commercial purposes
according to their demands is called a commercial bank. The main objective of
a commercial bank is to earn profit. These banks give interest at a low rate on the
deposited money. Alternatively. they charge interest at a higher rate from the
debtors. The difference between these two interests is the profit of a bank. The
bank gives loans for a short time from its reserve as itis bound to return money
whenever the account-holder demands it back. That is why this type of bank ts
known as entrepreneur of short-term-loan.

Commercial banks of Bangladesh are: Sonali Bank, Janata Bank, Rupali Bank,
Agrani Bank, Pubali Bank, Uttara Bank, City Bank, Arab-Bangladesh Bank,
Dutch-Bangla Bank, etc.

Janata Bank Building

Forma-13, Economics Class 9-10
98 Economics

Functions of Commercial Bank

In modern times, as a result of its performance of various activities, the
commercial bank has become an important organization of the state. Below is a
discussion on the major functions of a commercial bank:

1. Accepting Deposits

The first and foremost function of a commercial bank is to collect deposits from
individuals and companies. Commercial banks accept three types of deposits-
(a) Current Deposit, (b) Savings Deposil, (c) Fixed Deposit.

(a) Current Deposit: The account-holder of a current deposit can withdraw
money anytime. For that reason, no interest is given on this deposit.

(b) Savings Deposit: Money of savings deposit can be withdrawn twice a week
after a certain period of time. The bank gives some interest on this deposit.

(c) Fixed Deposit: This deposit is for a certain period. For example, 3 monihs
6 months, 1 year, 3 years, 5 years, etc. The bank gives interest at a higher rate
on this deposit. Money of such a deposit can even be withdrawn before it
matures. Some terms and conditions are followed in this case. But less
interest is paid.

2. Providing Loans

For earning profit commercial bank retains a particular amount of the deposit to
meet the demands of the account-holders and with the rest of the money it
provides loans to individuals or companies for short periods. Commercial banks
provide loans against appropriate surety and mortgage, e.g. expensive metal,
metal producis, government and foreign debentures, and permanent assets.
Commercial banks of our country provide loans for house-building, fisheries,
trade and commerce and industry.

3. Creating medium of exchange

At present commercial banks create cheques, bank-drafis, e-payments,
money-laundering and travelers' cheques as easy mediums of exchange.
Bank-issued cheques are vastly used in the mediums of exchange. In developed
countries most of the transactions are accomplished through cheques.

2023
2025

Money and Banking System 99

4. Supporting local and foreign trade

For supporting trade at both national and
international levels, commercial banks
besides supplying money, provide
suggestions to businesspersons. In addition,
giving identification m exchange-bills to
businesspersons, bill-discounting, providing
loans to importers-exporters, paying bills via
mail and telegrams are also arranged. In
some cases, exchanging goods through
banks, purchasing foreign currency and
debit-credit of buyers and sellers are also ha 2
solved. By performing these activities ‘Technology in Banking Programmes
commercial banks play a vital role in trade.

5. Money transfer

Banks transfer money safely and quickly from one place to another place on the
demand of clients. The media of sending money are cheques, bank drafts, postal
orders, travelers’ cheques, mail transfers and telegrams, etc.

6. Remittance

Commercial banks provide proper services, collecting foreign currency for the
people who are working abroad and handing it to the local receivers as soon as
possible.

7. Increase savings

Commercial banks collect small savings which are spread throughout the
country at different places and accumulate these as deposits. Banks help to make
capital to the business and production sectors, lending the amassed money. Thus
commercial banks increase savings of the country and at the same time
accelerate the development of economy.

Besides these, commercial banks do the following activities:

a. Store safely the valuable things of people, for example, deed copies and
valuable ornaments, etc. in the locker.
100 Economics

b. Help people to buy and sell shares, debentures of different companies and
c. public bonds.

Perform the task of a trustee by looking after the properties, arranging to
d, collect and give taxes for the properties.
e, Provide income certificates for the clients and make it secret.

Collect and pay cheques, exchange bills, house rents, income taxes,
insurance premiums and electric bills, etc. as a representative of the clients.

By completing the above tasks commercial banks play a vital role in the
economic development.

Task: How does a commercial bank accelerate the economic development of

a country? Explain.

7.4 Rules of opening and maintaining bank account

Sujon goes to deposit one part of his earning money to the branch of Sonali Bank
situated in his upazila town. One employer of the Sonali Bank Mr. Masud helps
him to open an account. At first Mr. Masud tells Sujon about the three types of
account which are (1) current account, (2) savings account and (3) fixed deposit.
He says that the rules are almost the same for opening all the accounts. Except
Grameen Bank, all the banks follow almost the same rules and regulations.
Sujon decides to open a savings account. At first he collects a form from the
branch and puts the necessary information in it.

According to the rules of the Bank he (applicant) has to take Sayem's signature
for identifying himself. Because Sayem, who is known to Sujon, has an account
in that bank. Sayem is called as an identifier. Besides, Sujon selects his wife as
a nominee and puts her information in the form. A nominee is a person selected
by the depositor, who in the absence of or after the death of the depositor will be
the owner of the deposited money. Sujon attaches the passport-size attested
photos, and photocopies of the national identity cards of his own and of his wife
to the filled-out form. He gives it to Mr. Masud. Then Mr. Masud tells him to
deposit minimum 500 tk (this amount may be less or more and varies at different
banks). According to the bank rules for opening an account within some

2023
2025

Money and Banking System 101

time, Mr. Masud gives an account number and a cheque book and a deposit book
to Sujon. Subsequently, using this account number Sujon can deposit cash,
cheques, bank drafts by the deposit book (moreover using online system
money can be deposited to the account number from inside as well as outside
of the country). Deposited money can be drawn by cheque and from ATM booth
(where ATM booth is available),

Nowadays computer and the internet are used in almost all the banks. So,
depositors can collect the list of the dates and amounts of the drawings and
deposited money (even can close their account if they wish). According to bank
rules, depositors can complete all activities about the transaction by using the
internet at present.

Like Sujon everybody can open any kind of bank account and maintain it by
depositing and drawing money according to their ability.

Task: Make a list of the continuous process of opening and maintaining a
bank account.

na - ee
se  Sanali Bank Linniitedt
ai He eee
serene 5 | —————
Paul oF ce icin fark
fers 2 sees
= Eafe Se a eecrree ne oe bree re neon ore
eet a eet
saeiteaibon =F pst Hircrinanttgconth Lea lovadpcmain cain
se et ee ee Selo a We ce
peat mon Bee aries
ee farce whee ra a ee ee
=,
a ar cette z ET Shain — s
ee eee ie et bila A
a Baits apie
a: Pray ey ee Clete ee ee OS CRP OP ee eit 6
a eke One Cee Ome Oey 0 ee:____ = ae a
1 Siebert nga fie’ Siaj ED-oerenvin sitet Clcietet oeet Toure Secemieierea lly
ec eee le ae Mbeya em
== = Serer rte ee, wig deem
wo eee ee Cee si mccain be lc ioe dns
Oot Cee toe Marni
= 4, as eae ae et
- — Oeste Ot Ox marks Saree ee eS ee ee ee eee cre
et ea]
a foe re etn Freya whey ew Ele
it - ‘ = eee are, ares
aieewiat "i <a —-
sua wb - - oan en
— \ 9 —— =: =
om ORE a eT
re. ‘ a eee ee ee ee ee eee ne ee
eae - SoS eee re ee roe vo =, ore ee oe
rane Tes wet
cere kl ero
Leen i sorte ete
. Te iT = ai.
oo om a es
=o (Ore Deena eer a Saal
Soe ee eee ee wie er mie
=e “
» fortes
terete ___ ea ——_- wees Fc
tee ye me ag ne se eee Sas
eed ee
mn ae ee a al faye ere ei

Part of Application for opening a Bank Account from.
102 Economics

7.5 Central Bank

Central Bank, sttuated at the top of the banking system is such an institution that
controls the whole banking system and works as a guardian of money market.
Being under the government ownership and control, it works for circulating
notes and coins, controlling loans, preserving the standard of currency. creating
and maintaining money market. It also works as currency advisor and banker of
the government. Its main characteristic is that it is the most powerful economic
institution of the government. So its main aim is nots earning profit rather
preserving economic balance and the highest development and welfare of the
country.

Central bank is the national institution. There is one central bank mm each and
every independent country. For example, Bangladesh Bank is the central bank of
Bangladesh, Reserve Bank of India ts for India, Federal Reserve System is for

the USA, Bank of England is for England.
7 a

Wi

ri : SSE —
Building of the Bank of England Fedecul Reserve Bunk Building

The 8
The Central bank performs different types of important tasks as the guardian and

controller of money market. The main functions of the central bank are:

LC

In

cifrcl

circ

acco

cur

time

cont

principles of the central bank in the most
Cases,

2025

Money and Banking System 103

2. Bank of Government

The central bank deposits the revenue of the government from the different
sectors and pays the money to different sectors according to the direction of the
government. During the time of monitory crisis, it provides long and short term
loans to the government. It works as a representative of the government,
maintaining the communication with the international economic institution, It
plays a vital role in giving information and advice to the economic activities and
deciding principles of the government.

3. Bank of other banks

Central bank authorizes licenses for new banks and their (banks) branches. It
provides necessary directions and advice to the enlisted banks to be
administered properly, According to the banking law, the enlisted banks are to
preserve a certain amount of their deposits in the central bank. In case of
necessity the enlisted banks can take a loan from this deposited fimd. In our
country, the commercial banks are to deposit 5% of their current and fixed
deposits according to the banking law of Bangladesh.

4. Controlling loans

Both paucity and excess of loan are counterproductive for the economic
development of a country, because the loans provided by the commercial banks
are included in the integral stock, which influences the price level and the value
of money. Money inflation occurs in country due to excess loan. Money defla-
tion occurs in a country due to the scarcity of loan. Central bank takes different
measures to control the capacity of loan disbursement of the scheduled banks for
those problems.

5. The last money lender

The enlisted banks go for the loan from the central bank when they fail to
manage loans from other sources. Central bank lends money to the jeopardized
listed commercial banks according to the ratio of their deposits and bonds. For
this, the central bank is called the last money lender.

6. Determining and controlling exchange rate
Central bank determines and controls the exchange rate of the currency of a

country in relation to the foreign currencies to bring stability and balance tn the
104 Economics

foreign transactions such as controlling the exchange rate of dollar and euro
against taka. For the convenience of business, central bank purchases and sells
foreign currency and gold on behalf of the government to keep the exchange rate
stable,

7. Clearing house

The commercial banks transact cheques,
bank drafts, pay orders among themselves.
Subsequently, one bank is either a debtor or
a creditor to the other and the central bank
preserves this record. This kind of debit or
credit is paid or cleared from the fund that
the enlisted commercial banks deposit in
the central bank. Thus, the central bank
functions as a clearing house for the
commercials banks. Automatic Clearance House

Moreover, the central bank does the
following functions:

a) Provides training to develop the standard of the involved employees in the
enlisted commercial banks.

b) After a certain period of time, looks into the economic activities of enlisted
commercial banks to observe whether these activities are going properly or
not.

c) Passes and implements various laws and principles for the betterment of
the mass and to develop the banking system.

d) Helps to found branches of commercial banks both at home and abroad.

e) Conducts research, collects and preserves different economic records for the
convenience of the mass and for drawing up the official economic policy.

f) Takes measures for the development of various aspects, such as
agriculture, industry, services (business, education, health).

Thus, the central bank contributes a lot to the entire socio-economic condition
preserving the stability in the economy.

20125
Money and Banking System 105

| Task: Central Bank can preserve the economic stability of a country. Elucidate.

7.6 Banking System in Bangladesh

In our country, Bangladesh Bank acts as the official bank (bank of the
government) and the guardian of the monetary institutions. Commercial banks
are administered to take and preserve deposits from people and to lend money in
the necessary areas to make profits. On the other hand, specialized organizations
are directed for developing special areas and reducing poverty.

Chart of the banking system in Bangladesh:

Banking system in Bangladesh

Central Bank Commercial Bank Specialized Bank (11)*
:
Bangladesh Bank Domestic Foreign (10)* Bangladesh Agricultural Bank
| Bangladesh Development Bank Led.
Bangladesh Cooperative Bank
: HSBC Bank
Goveument (4) Private (31)*
| . Standard Chartard Bank | | G*meen Bank
Janata Bank Lid, | | Pubali Bank Ltd. Habib Bank di
, Islanai Bank Ltd. State Bank of Indi
poialt Bane 116.) | poe Hank Lid,

Rupali Bank Ltd. | | City Bank Ltd.

Agrani Bank Ltd. | | National Bank Ltd.
Duch-Bangla Bank Lid,
NCC Bank Ltd.

Uttora Bank Ltd. see
AB Bank Ltd. Name of some Banks Among Domestic

IFIC Bank Ltd. Foreign and Specialized Private
Prime Bank Lid.

Forma-14, Economics Class 9-10
106 Economics

7.7 Role of important Banks of Bangladesh in Agricultural
Development, Industrialization and Self Entrepreneurship

In this regard, the contributions of some banks in Bangladesh are discussed below:

Bangladesh Bank

The name of the central bank of Bangladesh is
Bangladesh Bank. Bangladesh Bank was
established after the independence with the
"Bangladesh Bank Ordinance 1972" certified by
the then president. Since then this bank has been
a leading currency system in the country, It is
noteworthy that at its outset it possessed all the
properties the of State Bank of Pakistan. Leading
the economic and loan systems to the right Munogram (Bangladesh Bank}
direction and maintaining stable financial

conditions through the agricultural development, industrialization, and building
scope of self-reliant employment of the country, Bangladesh Bank contributes
to the overall economic development and welfare of the people of the country in
ihe follwing way:

Bangladesh Bank lends loan on easy terms to the organizations that provide
agricultural loans. Acting directly, Bangladesh Bank conducts research and
prepares statistics for the development of agriculture.

For the sake of prompt industrialization in the country, Bangladesh Bank lends
money to the organizations that supply capital to the industrial organizations. It
also provides entrepreneurship encouraging loans.

In exchange for debt instrument, the commercial banks carry out some
important tasks such as money lending, founding new banks, founding branches
of commercial and agricultural banks in undeveloped areas, ensuring the stock
of loan to facilitate loaning. In some special cases, the bank, of its own accord,
creates working opportunities for the unemployed young by providing loans on
easy terms.

Task: As guardian of monetary system, Bangladesh Bank plays an important
role in the overall development of Bangladesh. Elucidate.

202025
202025

Money and Banking System 107

Commercial Banks

A commercial bank is one of the main participants
that play a significant role in the extension and
development of business, development of
agriculture and industrialization of the country. On
the basis of ownership, the commercial banks can be
categorized into two types:

een

a) Governmental ,
Commercial Benk in Agricalture & Industrial Sector

b}) ~Non-governmental
The contributions of the commercial banks are described below:

Agriculture is an important sector in Bangladesh. So the economic development
of Bangladesh largely depends on the development of agriculture. The majority
of the farmers of this country are poor. They need sufficient agriculture loan to
carry out farming activities. For the development of agriculture, the commercial
banks take active part in loan-sanctioning activities at different times declared
by the government. The commercial banks run different loan sanctioning
programs for promoting food production, standard seeds, fertilizers, pesticides,
deep tube wells and less-deep tube wells for irrigation and for establishing
cottage industries. At preseni, according to Bangladesh Bank, farmers get the
facility of opening bank accounts giving only Tk 10 as deposit. As a result, the
data collection of all the farmers of Bangladesh becomes easier within a short
lime.

The commercial banks take the scattered individual savings as deposit from
different parts of the country. From this, the bank provides loans for the
construction and extension of small, medium and large scale industries. The
commercial banks provide enough loans under easy conditions for purchasing
taw materials for industry and modern machinery. Besides, the bank assists in
developing mills and factories, purchasing the shares of the new companies.

Commercial banks help in creating employment opportunity. At present, these
banks have started to provide loans against individual security for purchasing
rickshaws, vans, opening grocery shops, rice mills, wheat mills, etc. It is hoped
that this will create employment opportunity for many people.
108 Economics

Task; Commercial banks are a powerful partner in the economic development
of a country. Exucidate.

Bangladesh Krishi Bank

Bangladesh Krishi Bank has been established for promoting the dynamism of
agriculture, attaming self-reliance in agriculture and for the overall development
of agriculture. This bank has been established after the independence of the
country, according to Ordinance 1973 with the assets and liabilities of Pakistan
Krishi Bank. It is a state-owned and semi autonomous institution. The role of
Bangladesh Krishi Bank is discussed below:

Baneladesh Krishi Bank provides small, medium and large scale loans for
promoting the production of agriculture and sectors related to agriculture.

a. The majority of the farmers of our country are poor. So this bank provides
short-term loan for fulfilling the little requirements of the farmers, for
example, purchasing fertilizers, seeds, pesticides, ploughing land, weed-out,
threshing crops, harvest, etc. Generally, this loan is to be paid within 18
months.

b. This bank provides medium-scale loans for leveling land, setting up
semi-deep tube wells, for buying cattle for ploughing land and purchasing
light agricultural machinery. Generally, this loan is to be paid from 18
months to 5 years.

ec. Krishi Bank provides long-term loans for purchasing land, heavy machinery,
(e.g. tractors, harvesters, etc.), setting up deep tube wells, constructing
warehouses, constructing coldstorage, digging canals for wrigation,
developing tea lands etc. This loan is to be paid from 5 years to 20 years.

This bank provides financial and technical assistance for establishing agriculture
based small and cottage industries. This bank also provides loans for raising
poultry, setting up sericulture, and pisciculture and helping the unemployed
youth get the facility of self-employment.

202823
202025

Money and Banking System 109

Task: Modernization of agriculture is possible through the agriculture loan of
Bangladesh Krishi Bank. Explain.

Bangladesh Development Bank Limited

According to the decision of the government, the Vendors Agreement was
signed between the government and the Board of Directors of Bangladesh
Development Bank Limited on 31st December, 2009. Thus the two institutions—
Bangladsh Shilpo Bank and Bangladesh Shilporin Songstha— are unified as
Bangladesh Development Bank. So the assets, liabilities and workforce of these
two closed institutions have been handed over to the new institution, The role of
this bank is discussed below:

Generally this bank provides loan for the development or extension of industries
related to our country, for example. jute mdustry, leather mdustry. sugar
industry, fertilizer mdustry, etc. This bank gives priority to agriculture based
industry of the rural areas which is helpful for both production and development
of agriculture.

This bank provides long-term loans for introducing new industry, extension and
modernization of old industry in both public and private sectors. The maximum
timeline of repaying the loan of this bank is 20 years, It also provides short term
loan for the necessity of mills, factories and industries. It supplies entrepreneurs
with free technical counseling and industrialization-related research, statistics
and information.

This bank provides different term-based loans in small and medium scale
industries with the aim of attaining selfreliance, promoting production and
employment. It gives important counseling and assistance in establishing
small-scale industry to make women self-dependent. It gives investment
facilities and formulates the blueprint of industrial activities so that business
enterprises are taken privately.

Task: Write down the role of Bangladesh Development Bank Limited in
production and employment.

110 Economics

Grameen Bank

Grameen Bank is a specialized financial institution, which has been established
with the aim of providing banking service to the landless, helpless males and
females, and the owners of less amount of land in the villages. This bank
provides micro-credit to the general people for production activities. Grameen
Bank first emerged in 1983 as a specialized financial institution. The role of this
bank is discussed below:

This bank gives loans to poor, landless and helpless farmers under easy
conditions and without any security. For the development of agriculture, it
provides loans in the sectors of vegetable cultivation, raising cows, pisciculture,
poultry farming, etc. As this bank gives loans under easy conditions, the farmers
need not take loans from local rich people under hard conditions with a high rate
of interest.

Grameen Bank provides loans as well as
supplics materials and required information to
make the deprived section of the country ©
attached to local small scale and cottage
industries, for example, crafts of bamboo and —
cane, making biri, soap, cloths, sweetmeats, etc.
Palliphone facility has been launched with the | [9%
technical support of Grameen Phone to take the | bey
facility of information technology to the people |
of remote areas.

Grameen bank is the bank which is directed to
create employment opportunities and organize
the unemployed deprived group under
institutional structure. This bank provides the of Grameen Bank
beggars the opportunity of self-employment giving interest free loans. It
encourages women for job and helps them in flourishing their leadership
qualities. It gives Palliphone to the poor and helpless women as loan.
Rehabilitation for women is attempted after repaying the loan from its income.
Dividend is provided to the poor owners from its profit every year.

202825
202025

Money and Banking System 111

Task: The role of Grameen Bank in changing the tate of deprived people is

undeniable. Explain.

Cooperative Bank

Cooperative Bank is the bank which is formed and directed according to the
principles of cooperation. The objective of this bank is to provide loans with
little interest on the basis of mutual cooperation. Bangladesh Cooperative Bank
Limited is run with the joint ownership of the government and the cooperative
section of the country. The cooperative institutions have 86% and the
government has 14% ownership of the share of this bank. The role of
cooperative bank is discussed below:

The bank provides agriculture loan to the members of cooperative society with
the aim of alleviating poverty, promoting food production, etc. The sectors of
loan are: agriculture, land, land development. Aaush, Aamon, Boro cultivation,
cultivation of the crops and vegetables of winter season, different agricultural
instruments, seeds. fertilizers, pesticides, imgation machines. tractors, etc.
There are three types of agriculture loan: short term for 6 months, medium term
for 2 years and long term for 5 years.

This bank provides finance to agriculture based industries, which are organized
on the basis of cooperation and in construction industries. This bank undertakes
microcredit activities for the employment of the rural young males and females.
The cooperative bank is the partner of the project named "Akti Bari Akti
Khamar" undertaken by the government. It also provides finance for
employment in the sectors of pisciculture, raising animals, poultry farming,
processing and preservation of produced goods, etc. Thus this bank plays an
important role in both reducing unemployment and alleviating poverty,

Task: Explain the role of Bangladesh Cooperative Bank in attaining
self-reliance of the cooperative members.

112 Economics

Exercise
Short Questions
1. What do you mean by money?

2. What do you mean by commercial bank?

3. What do you mean by clearing house?

Descriptive Questions

Describe the fimctions of money.
Elucidate the functions of a commercial bank.

State the tasks of central bank.

> we NM PR

Mention the contributions of "Krishi Bank" in the development of the economy of
Bangladesh,

Multiple-Choice Questions
1) Which is the prime and preliminary task of a commercial bank?

a. lending money b. taking deposits

c. transferring money d. constructing the means of exchange
2) Which coin can be transacted at any amount?

a. coinof TK. 2 b, Note of TK. 2

c. coinofTK. 5 d. Note of TK. 5

Read the following passage and answer questions 3 and 4.

Arif deposits his saved money in an organization. At the end of the year, he
withdraws his deposited money with some additional money.

3. What is the name of the organization where Arif conducts his transaction?
a. Bangladesh Bank b. Shomobai Bank

ec. Sonali Bank d. Grameen Bank

202025
Money and Banking System 113

4. The contribution of this institution to the economy of the country is
i. raising capital,
ii. preserving the standard of coin.

lil. economic development.

Which of the following is correct?

a. i b. iand ii

¢. iand iti d. i,iiand iti
Creative Questions

1. Ratna is appointed in a financial institution. Her institution cannot provide
loan but acts as consultant for other financial institutions in the case of loan
sanctioning. On the other hand, her friend is engaged in another financial
institution. It deposits the savings of people as well as gives extra amount
against the deposits.

a. What is the barter system?

b. Describe the function of money as the medium of savings.

c. Explain the nature of Ratna's institution,

d. Analyze the difference between Ratna's institution and her friend's.

2. Harun's wife badly needs a sari. But he has nothing but a goat. Harun took
the goat to a weaver and the weaver wants the goat in exchange for the sari.
But Harun does not agree to get a sari in exchange for a goat. This problem
is solved when a material is discovered and acceptable to everyone.

a. What is legal money?
b. What is meant by Clearing House?
c. Explain the reason of Harun’s unwillingness to buy the sari from the weaver.

d. Analyze the role of the material acceptable io everyone in the light of your textbook.

Forma-15, Economics Clase 9-10
