Chapter Three
Cell Division

Different types of cell division occur in all types of organisms from
unicellular to multi-cellular. One land of cell division causes increases in body
growth of the organism, and in the other type of cell division, developed
reproductive cells and in some other cases organism multiplies through binary

fission. In this chapter, you will lear how different types of cell division
occur.

PN25
* explain the concept of cell division;

* describe the types of cell division;

* explain mitosis;

+ describe the stages of mitosis;

* analyse the significance of mitosis cell division in living bodies;

* explain metosis;

* explain the role of meiosis in the development of reproductive cells;

* understand the role of cell division in maintenance of the continuity of life.

Forma-07, Biology Class-9-10
3.1 Cell Division and its classification

Every living body is made up ofa cell or cells. The life of every organism starts
with a single cell. In fact, every cell is originated from a pre-existing one. The
increase of cells in number through division is very natural and important.
The bodies of some organisms are composed of a single cell. They are called
unicellular organisms, such as, bacteria, Amoeba, Plasmodium etc. These
organisms multiply themselves from the division of a single cell. Other
organisms are composed of more than one cell. They are called multicellular
organisms. Humans, mango and banyan trees etc. are composed of crores of
cells. A giant banyan tree also initiates its structure after the formation of a
single cell (zygote by the union of two gametes). After the fertilization of an
egg, the structure of a human is achieved with crores of cells dividing through
the process of cell division. Again, male and female gametes are produced for
the emergence of new generations. Cells divide through the process of cell
division for the growth and reproduction of organisms.

Types of cell division:

Two important types of cell division that occur in living beings are: Mitosis
and Meiosis.

3.2 Mitosis

Through this process of division an eukaryotic cell divides into two identical
daughter cells. In this process, the nucleus and chromosomes are divided only
once, and two identical daughter cells are produced with the same type of
chromosomes in number, physical and structural features as their mother cell.

This is also known as equational division. Mitosis occurs in somatic cells of
eukaryotic organisms and through this division, as the number of cells
increases, plants and animals grow. The process usually takes place in the body
cells of animals and in the meristems of the plant parts growing, such as the tip
of stems and roots, plumule and radicle, developing leaves, buds etc. This kind
of cell division also occurs in lower plants and animals during asexual
reproduction.

3.2.1 Stages of Mitosis: Mitosis is 4 contmuous process. During nutosis,
karyokinesis is usually followed by cytokinesis. Karyokinesis and cytokinesis
represent the division of nucleus and the division of cytoplasm respectively.
Before starting division, a cell has to prepare itself. This stage is called
interphase. For ease of deseription, mitosis can be divided into five stages. They are:
(a) Prophase, (b) Prometaphase. (c) Metaphase, (d) Anaphase. (e) Telophase.

iy
S

Lae |
£23

(a) Prophase: This is the first stage of mitosis. At the onset of the stage, the nucleus
becomes little larger and chromatin fibers start condensing into short, thick and
tightly coiled structures called chromosomes. Previously it is considered that
this changes of chromosome occur due to water reduction but modern research
shows that the matter is extremely complex process having no relation with
water. At this stage, chromosome can be seen with a compound microscope.
Though every chromosome then divides into two sister chromatids, at the
centromere they remain attached. As the chromosomes are still tangled, it is
difficult to easily count the number of chromosomes in a cell.

Tl

Nuclear
membrane

(Furst stage! (Last sage)
Figure: 3.02 Prophase (Animal cell)

(b) Prometaphase: Early in this stage, spindle apparatus with two poles is
developed in plant cells from fiber protein. The middle plane of the spindle
apparatus is called the equator. Some fibers of the spindle apparatus, made of
microtibules of cytoskeleton, are stretched from one pole to the other. These are

called Spindle fibers. At this stage, kinetochores in the centromeres of
chromosomes attach to some fibers of the spindle apparatus. Kinetochores are
) —— Pole
| — Spindle apparatus Centriole
—— Chromosome
—— Disappearing
} autsvtics Chromosome
Spindle fiber
— Disappearing wig:
nuclear membrane Nee Aster ray
Animal cell

Figure: 3.03 Pro-metaphase

protein structures assembled on centromeres, and they link the chromosomes
with mitotic spindles. These fibers are generally called traction fibers. They are
also sometimes called chromosomal fibers as chromosomes are attached with
them. Chromosomes then start assembling on the equatorial plane. The nuclear
membrane and nucleolus start to disintegrate and disappear. In animal cells, the
spindle apparatus is developed from centrioles, and the centrioles remain in the
two poles with astral rays spreading out from them,

(c) Metaphase: At the onset of the stage, all the chromosomes assemble at the
equator, from the two poles. The centromere of each chromosome remains on the
equator but the two arms take positions towards the poles. In this stage. the

Pol i
= ( mea Spindle fiber
—— Spindle fiber

— Spindle fiber Chromatid
— Chromosomal

region

Chromosome Centromere

Pole Aster ray

Annmal cell
Plant cell

Figure: 3.04 Metaphase
chromosomes look short and thick. The two chromatids of each tend to be
separated from each other. At the end of this stage, the division of the centromere
starts. The nuclear membrane and nucleolus disappear completely.

(d) Anaphase: The sister chromatids become the two sister chromosomes and
they are pulled apart. The cleaved centromere moves to the pole, while the
chrornatids trail behind. Each chromosome, splitting into two, moves to the
two poles, and so the number of chromosome remains unchanged, On the

2025
2025

|) 7 Disappearing
/ spindle fiber

} - 1 shaped

Pole

Animal cell
ent cetl Figure : 3.05 Anaphase

centromere in the chromosome, the chromosomes look V, L, J or L shaped, and
these chromosomes are called metacentric, sub-metacentric, acrocentric and
telocentric respectively, At the end of the anaphase stage, the daughter
chromosomes are completely pulled apart to the two poles and start their
elongation.

(e) Telophase: This is the last stage of mitosis and a reversal of the prophase.
Chromosome again starts to become thin and long. Previously thought that the
increasing of water is the reason for this. But modern research has shown that it
is a complex process and not depending on the amount of water in the
chromosome. Finally they mtertwined and form nuclear reticulum, The
nucleolus also reappears. The nuclear membrane reappears around the nuclear
reticulum. So, ultimately, two new nuclei are formed in the two poles. The
spindle apparatus disintegrate and so, the spindle fibers gradually disappear.

Pp ———— Coll Plate
Ts Disappearing
spimlle Fiber
(aes nucleus

-SS==s Figure: 3.06 Tel { Animal cell

At the end of the telophase stage, some small parts from the endoplasmic
reticulum aggregate in the equatorial plane, and collectively form the structure of
the cell plate. Equal distribution of the cytoplasmic organelles is accomplished. As
a result, two identical daughter cells are developed. In the case of an animal cell,
a contractile ring on the plasma membrane at the equatorial plane pinches off the
two nuclei.

Anaphase Te elophase Daughter cells
Figure 3.07: Different stages of mitosis division under light microscope

e529) Group Activity.

Activity: To prepare models of various chromosomes based on the position |
of centromeres.

Essentials: Rope or thread, art paper. glue, scotch tape, cutter, sign pen.
Procedure: First, we will prepare the model of a chromosome during the
metaphase stage. Take two pieces of rope or thread of equal length. These
two pieces will be the models of the two sister chromatids of a chromosome.
Make a knot in the middle of the rope. This knot is the model of the
centromere. If the knot is made properly, we will get a model of the
metacentric chromosome, from whose centromere four arms seem lo appear.
Two of these four arms belong to one chromatid while the other two belong
to the other chromatid. The length of all arms are equal.

Figure 3.08 : Different types of the model of chromatid on the basis of the position of
centromere which is vissible in the phase of mataphase ( from teft to right)

Similarly, take two more pieces of rope or thread of equal length and prepare
a model of a submetacentric chromosome by placing the knot a bit away
from the center. If knots are placed near the poles. a model of an acrocentric
chromosome will be made. And if the knot is placed right at the poles, then
it will be a model of a teloceniric chromosome. Now, use glue or scotch tape

ey
S
a
2025

to stick these four kinds of models on an art paper. Label the models with a sign
pen. Write Metaphase as the heading on the art paper.

Now, through the same process, prepare models of chromosomes seen in the
Anaphase stage. First make the four models of metacentric, submetacentric,
acrocentric and telocentric chromosomes of the metaphase stage. In the
anaphase stage, each chromosome is divided mto two parts along the
centromere such that one chromatid with half of the centromere remains in
each part. So here we will cut the chromosome model of the metaphase stage
along the knot into two, so there is one chromatid in each part.

We will see that each of the two chromatids from the metacentric
chromosome looks like the letter “V’ as the position of the centromere is at
the middle of the chromatids. If the chromatid taken half from the
submetacentric choromosome with the centromere a bit away from the
center, it takes the appearance of English letter *L’. Similarly, the chromatids
taken from the acrocentric and telocentric chromosomes will look like *J*
and ‘T’ respectively. Now stick the model of these four chromatid models on
art paper with glue or scotch tape. Label the model with the sign pen. Write
the word Anaphase as the heading on this art paper.

Now present both art papers in the classroom. Explain how the
chromosome or chromatid looks in metaphase or anaphase stage.

Significance of mitosis

The significance of mitosis in the living body of organisms is immense. The
balance between the nucleus and cytoplasm of a cell in terms of volume and
amount is maintained by mitosis. Through mitosis, the growth in the body of
multicellular organisms occurs. All multicellular organisras start their life from a
single cell zygote. The repeated division of this single cell produces innumerable
cells and thus an organism grows to completion. It may seem that if the cells
multiply one at a time, it would take a long time to take the complete shape of a
living being (the human body has 30 trillion cells). But this is not true. All cells are
capable of mitosis when provided with necessary nutrients. If each cell division
takes one day to complete, the number of cells necessary for human beings can

be created in 40 — 50 days.
As the number and feature of chromosomes remain unchanged in cells produced
through mitosis, growth in organisms takes place systematically. Mitosis plays a
role in the maintenance of the size, shape and volume of cells. Unicellular
organisms reproduce through mitosis. Mitosis plays an important role in the
vegetative reproduction of organisms and increasing the number of reproductive

cells. It is essential to form new cells for growth and healing of injuries. The life
span of some cells is predetermined and they are, accordingly, replaced through
the process of mitosis. As identical cells are produced through mitosis,
qualitative features of the living world remain unchanged. Mitotic errors may
result m abnormal mass of cells called tumours, with or without cancer cells.

Tumour and cancer: All of us are familiar with the words ‘tumour’ and ‘cancer’.
These are the results of irregular cell divisions. In mitosis, a cell divides into two,
two cells divide into four and so on. The process remains controlled. If this
control is lost due to any reason, cell division occurs in an regular way. This
results in the formation of a tumour.

The formation of cancer cells is also the result of uncontrolled, irregular cell
division. Research has shown that various types of germs, chemicals or
radioactivity can be responsible for the development of cancer cells. Two genes,
E6 and E7 of the papilloma virus. produce a chemical substance that displaces
two protein molecules which control cel! division. As a result, the controlling
factor of cell division is eliminated, and a tumour is formed. Sometimes these
two genes amalgamate with those of host cell and stop the functions of protein
molecules that control increase of cell. This leads to cancer cells or in other word
cancer.

Cancer is a dangerous disease. Cancer can develop in the liver, lungs. brain,
breasts, skin or uterus almost all organs of the body.

Activity; The teacher will group the students, ask them to present the |
different mitotic stages after drawing them on their own.

f025
Cell Division o4
3.3 Meiosis

In this process of cell division, four daughter cells are produced from an
eukaryotic cell. The nucleus divides twice and the chromosomes divides once in
this process and the number of chromosomes becomes half in the daughter cells
from that of the mother cell, So, the amount of DNA also become near about half,
As the number of chromosome decreases this process of cell division is called
reductional division.

The question is why meiosis occurs. In mitosis. the number of chromosomes in the
daughter cells remains the same as that of their mother cell. Mitosis is essential for
the growth and asexual reproduction of organisms. In sexual reproduction, the
union of male and female gametes is required. If the number of chromosomes in
the reproductive cells would be the same as the somatic cell, the zygote would
contain twice number of chromosomes than that of the somatic cell. Suppose the
number of chromosomes in a somatic reproductive cell of an organism is 4. In the
zygote the number of chromosomes would be §, and so the new organisms will
have body cells with § chromosomes, that is. twice that of its mother organism.
Ifevery life cycle of an organism continues thal way, the number of chromosome
would be doubled again and again. In the second chapter, we learnt that
chromosomes have the genes controlling the features of organisms. If the number
of chromosome is increased life cycle after life cycle, the offspring will be
fundamentally different. In sexual reproduction, even through the union of
male and female gametes, the number of chromosomes remains the same
generation after generation as the number of chromosomes becomes half in the
reproductive cells than that of the mother cell. At the time of development of
teproductive cells and in any stage of
the life cycle of plants in lower
groups, meiosis occurs. The feature

oF a (E

dr an) ay,
of possessing half number of )
chromosome is called haploid. When val fa)
the haploid (n) cells are fused, the {n)
state of cell having two sets of
chromosome is called a diploid (20). pyemardiai (n)
As meiosis occurs. the features in the on QO 65)
species of living organisms stay the 7m —

Th,

Figure: 3.09 concept of meiosis cell division

ut

in)

same, generation after generation.

Forma-08, Biology Class-9-10
58 Biology
Meiosis mainly occurs in the primordial germinal cells during the development of
gametes. Meiosis occurs in the anthers and ovules of flowering plants and in the
testes and ovaries of animals. During the development of the haploid meiosis
occurs in the zygotes of pollen from diploid pollen mother cells in haploid plants
like fungus, algae and mosses.

Two consecutive divisions occur in a cell in the process of meiosis, called
meiosis- I and meiosis-II respectively.

Premordial germinal ce

In the first division (meiosis-I), the

number of chromosomes in a

daughter cell becomes half that of  ,yeiosis
its mother cell. The second division

a ‘i .
is simply mitosis. Ovum (| A FV Jspenn

—_
: : . + Diploid
number in organisms remains constant. @ . vive
Genetic diversity is also found in species Zygote C>- Taploid

Because of meiosis, the chromosome

of organisms as the exchange of Figure: 3.10 Formation of zygote

genes occurs during meiosis. due to meiosis cell division

In reality, sometimes a new species may come into being if suddenly the number
of chromosomes increases. For example, one species of frog Xenopus laevis was
created when the chromosome set of another species Yenopus tropicalis was
doubled. In somatic cells (not reproductive cells) of different members of the
Plant kingdom (such as vegetables like potato), this is a normal process,
Sometimes we select this species of plant intentionally, or even create them in
a planned way because their size is comparatively
bigger. Such species are helpful in mecting the
increasing demand of food. Besides creating
homologous chromosomes through genetic
recombination, meiosis also contributes in
maintaining genetic diversity or genetic variation.
Through sexual reproduction, a population

maintains its genetic diversity and creates unique
individuals in each new generation. SSS eaeetnpen

B. Nemagues laevis

2025
£23

Genetic variation among the members of a species is what ensures that the species

is able to survive in a changing environment. Ecosystems are not static, and species
need genetic variation on which natural selection can operate so that they can
adjust with a new or changed environment. [fall of the individuals of a species are
too genetically similar and have no genetic variation, then there is less
possibility of surviving in a new situation. A single disease or change in the
environment could drive the species to extinction. But if genetic variation exists in
aly species, there is the possibility of survival in a new environment. At least some
members of the species will be able to escape danger that may be fall on them.
Thus, meiosis increases the possibility of survival by creating genetic diversity.

(?)Exercise

1. What is cell division?
2. What is meant by equational cell division?

1. Describe the difterent stages of mitosis with labeled diagrams.
2. Discuss the significance of mitosis.

ey) Multiple choice questions

l. In which stage does a nucleus become larger?

a. Prophase b. Metaphase

c. Anaphase a. Telophase
2, Through meiosis-

i. the number of chromosomes is changed,

li. haploid gametes are developed.

ili, consistency of features in organisms is maintained,
Which one of the following is correct?

a, i &ii b, ii & ii

c. i & iii di, tt & iii
Answer the following questions 3 and 4 based on the figure given below.

Figure-A
Figure-B

3. Inthe cell division of figure A-

i. the mother cell and the daughter cells bear same features.
ii. the number of chromosome becomes half in the newly developed cell.
iil. chromosomes divide once.

Which one of the following is correct?

a.i & ii b. ii & iti

6.1 & iti da, Wi & ii

The division in the figure B is different trom that of figure A and so-
a. the number of chromosomes remains the same in the daughter cells.
b, the number of chromosomes increases.

c. abnormal cells are produced.

d. the normal growth of the body occurs.

ao oF p

Stage-A Stage-B

Where does mitosis occur?

Write in detail why meiosis is called ‘reductional division’.

In stage B what changes occur? Explain.

Analyse what problems may emerge if the process expressed in the figures above
isnot accomplished properly.

2025
