2025

Chapter Nine
Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh

Bangladesh is a low middle-income developing country. There lies a huge
potential to develop. This development is possible through high growth rate,
poverty alleviation, equal distribution, development of human resources and
good governance.

Alter studying this chapter, we will be able to

.

explain the relationship between economic growth and development:

explain the characteristics of developed, less developed and developing countries;
identify the stages of development of Bangladesh economy;

make a list of obstacles to economic development of Bangladesh;

explain the importance of development projects run by Bangladesh government:

explain the importance of development projects run by Non-government
Organizations for national development;

explain the type, reasons and ways of reducing poverty in Bangladesh;
analyse the nature of unemployment in Bangladesh and the ways to remove it

explain the concept of human resources and

explain the way in which the population of a nation can become its asset.
136 Economics

9.1 Economic Growth and Development
Though it seems the economic development and economic growth are the same,
but they are not. There is a basic difference between these two concepts.

Economic Growth

In a particular time, the rate of increase of the total market value of the
produced goods and services of a country is called economic growth.
Generally, the annual rate of increase of GDP is known as economic growth.
Economic growth can be measured by the rate of increase of per capita income.

Economic Development

Economic development does not mean only economic growth. As a result of
economic development, people’s per capita income increases also. There occurs
qualitative change in economy such as the increase of people's consumption,
increase of employment and overall development through the development of
technology.

So, for economic growth, only the increase in total national income is enough.
And when economic development occurs, it must be understood that there has
been a qualitative change in growth along with economic condition. For this
we can write, Economic development = Economic growth + Qualitative

changes in economy.

| Task: Distinguish between growth and development. |

9.2 Characteristics of Developed, Least Developed and Developing
Countries

Developed Country: The country whose economic development happens
which is sustained for a long time is called a developed country. The standard
of living of the people of these countries is very high.

Least Developed Country: According to professor Ragnar Nurkse,
least developed countries are countries whose capital is less than their human
resources and natural resources. The people in these countries lead a poor life.

a
=
Le |
Important Economic [ssues in Bangladesh 137

Developing Country: The countries, where per capita real income is less
than that of the developed countries, but where a positive change is
happening in development indicators, are called developing countries. The per
capita income of these countries are increasing and their standard of living is
gradually increasing. They are advancing from low income to middle income
and from middle income to high income.

There are different characteristics for developed, least developed and
developing countries. Though the characteristics of least developed and
developing countries seem to be almost the same, they have different
characteristics.

9.2.1 Characteristics of Developed Countries
The characteristics of developed countries are given below:

1. Land and Natural Resources: Developed countries are enriched with
sufficient natural resources. These countries ensure the proper use and
protection of land and natural resources. Developed countries like the
United States, Japan, European countries are ruling the modern world
through the efficient use and protection of natural resources.

Capital: In the developed countries the supply of capital is sufficient. In
this economy capital is created through savings.

3. Skilled Manpower: The requirement of skilled manpower is a must for the
economic development of any country. Even if a country is rich in natural
resources, capital, etc., it cannot be economically developed if it lacks
skilled workforce. Developed countries keep a special eye on the
development of skilled workforce. Skilled workforce can be built up
through standard education, training and research.

4. High Average Life Expectancy: The average number of years the people
of developed countries are expected to live is generally more because of
advanced facilities of health services.

Forma-18, Economics Class 9-10
138 Economics

un

Technical Knowledge: The production capacity of the workers in
developed countries has increased a lot and the main reason for this
increase is the development of technical knowledge. A county that has more
technical knowledge is more developed. People in developed countries
control nature through improved technical knowledge and get things that
are desired from nature.

Political Stability: Political stability is the prime requirement for the
economic development. Economic development is restrained in those
countries that do not have political stability. Political stability being
prevalent in the developed countries, economic development is possible.
inspite of the change of the government in these countries, the economic
policy, plan and good governance remain stable.

Developed Infrastructural and ‘Transportation System: More
production and development are possible where transportation systems are
more developed because the development of transportation system reduces
production cost and increases investment. Thus production increases,

Task: Make a list of the characteristics of economic development in the
developed countries.

9.2.2 Characteristics of Least Developed Countries

Most of the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America are less developed. Most
of the people of the world live in these countries. The characteristics of least

developed countries are given below:

1.

Less Productive Agricultural Sector: Most of the people in less

developed countries live in the rural areas. They are directly or indirectly

related to agricultural production and dependent on agriculture. The
production procedure and technologies related to agriculture are primitive.

Agriculture Based Economy: A big portion of national income of these
countries comes [rom agriculture.

2023
2025

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 139

a

Un

Unemployment: Since the economy of less developed countries is
agriculture based, disguised and seasonal unemployment problems are
severely noticed there,

Low Per Capita Income: Per capita income and savings are low in least
developed countries. For this reason, investment and production are also
low.

Vicious Cycle of Poverty: In least developed countries income is low since
the production is low. It leads to low savings. Investment is low because
savings are low. Thus there is shortage of capital. Here the production
decreases. This situation is called the vicious cycle of poverty. Because of
this cycle the development process in least developed countries is slower.

High Population: In most of the least developed countries the population
is high and per capita income is low. Food, clothes, shelter, education,
transport, treatment and employment cannot be provided properly in least
developed countries due to high population.

Use of Land and Natural Resources: Least developed countries cannot
ensure efficient use of land and resources through the development of
technologies and methods. Therefore. economic development does not get
flow.

Inefficient Communication and Transportation System: The
communication and transportation systems in less developed countries
are inefficient. So, there exist the problems of product trans-shipment.
Production cost increases. Entrepreneurs are not interested in
investment,

Imbalanced Trade: The least developed countries are not developed in
manufacturing sector. Thus they have to export agricultural goods, raw
materials, primary goods and import manufactured goods. Agricultural
raw materials that are low in price are exported and the same products are
imported at high price when they are turned into manufacturing goods.
For this reason there is an imbalance in trade.
140

10.

Economics

Weak Manufacturing structure: In less developed countries manufacturing
structure is primitive and they lack high capital-based industries. [In this
weak structure of manufacturing industries, the employment is low and the
skills of workers are also insufficient.

Task: Compare an underdeveloped country with a developed country.

9.2.3 Characteristics of Developing Countries

Some important characteristics of developing countries are given below:

1.

Agro-based Economy: Most of the people are directly or indirectly
dependent on agriculture. A remarkable part oflabour force is engaged
in agriculture. In agriculture, primitive methods are used in the small
farms. However development of modern technology is noticed here also.
There is always a natural disaster like flood, drought, etc.

Per Capita Income: The per capita income in developing countries is lower
than that of developed countries but more than less developed countries. So
the standard of living is not so high,

Incomplete Utilization of Natural Resources: Though most of the
developmg countries have a lot of natural resources, they are not being
completely utilized.

Shortage of Capital: Per capita income in developing countries is low. So
savings are also low. Low savings create problem im the formation of
capital.

Primary goods producing country: Developing countries mainly
produce primary goods and use labour intensive technologies. Primary
goods mean the raw-materials of any indusiry, e.g. jute, leather, etc.

Development of Industries: In the developing countries, industries are in
the primary phase but the development of export based labour intensive
industries are noticed in some places.

Deficit in Foreign Trade: Every year in developing countries import
expenditure exceeds the export earnings. For this reason these countries
have to face trade delicil every year.

2023
2025

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 141

8.

10.

Lack of Entrepreneur: Most of the products in developing countries are
from agriculture. The instability in the prices of these products is high.
This creates risk for the investors. As a result, development is hampered
due to lack of domestic and foreign entrepreneurs.

Weak Economic Infrastructure: Economic infrastructure like
communication and transportation, electricity bank, insurance, etc. is
insufficient.

Dependency on Foreign Aid: The infrastructural development of
developing countries depends mostly on foreign aids.

Task: Determine the type of Bangladesh economy.

9.3 Obstacles to Economic Development of Bangladesh

Because of many socio-economic and political reasons, developing counties like

Bangladesh cannot prosper quickly.

1.

Dependency on Agriculture: Though the economy of Bangladesh
mostly depends on agriculture, tts production capacity is low. Though the
development in Bangladesh agriculture is necessary, its advancement is
slow.

Underdeveloped Agricultural System: The agricultural system in
Bangladesh is underdeveloped. The use of modern equipment in
agriculture is limited. And there is instability in the price of agricultural
products.

Lack of Capital: Since the per capita income in Bangladesh is low, rate of
raising savings and capital is also low. As a result, it is not possible to
invest as much as is needed for quick development.

Lack of entrepreneur: Entrepreneurs are the main point for economic
development. In Bangladesh, there is a lack of entrepreneurs who are
efficient, experienced and ready to take a risk. Due to lack of entrepreneur,
savings and capital are used less in the production section. And for
142

Economics

political and economical instability, entrepreneurs are not ready to take
only risk and do not come forward as the environment is not
investment-friendly. Because of the interest to foreign countries. a good
amount of capital goes out also.

High Population: Bangladesh is a country of high population. It is not
being possible to completely use this population in production and work.
So a big portion of national production is used for this population, which
poses obstacles for development.

Vicious Cycle of Poverty: One of the main obstacles in the development of
Bangladesh economy is the vicious cycle of poverty. According to
Professor Narks, "A country is poor because it is poor." Low production,
low income, low demand and savings, low investment and low capital are
called the vicious cycle of poverty.

Political Instability: In Bangladesh there is political uncertainty and
instability. It is not favourable for domestic and foreign investment. Not
only this, the long term development plan is also hampered by this.

Dependency on Foreign Aid: The economy of Bangladesh is dependent
on foreign trade and relationship. It faces obstacles in trade for
imbalanced competition with developed countries and for their various
conditions. On the other hand, dependency on foreign aid and
investment on agriculture, manufacturing and business create obstacles in
the development of self-reliant Bangladesh. But because of recent increase
in exportation of garments and huge remittance, Bangladesh’s dependency
on foreign aid is on the decrease.

Weak Marketing: Weak marketing exists everywhere in Bangladesh.
Market price is not profitable for producer due to lack of awareness,
weakness in communication and transport system, and lack of fund. The
marketing system has not been yet developed in a developing country like
Bangladesh. The market price for the producers does not bring any benefit
because of the mischievousness of the middle interest.

2025
2025

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 143

10. Obstacles in Application of Technology: Modem technologies cannot be
used in production due to lack of modem technology, costly imported
technologies and risks in implementation.

Task: Make a list of the main obstacles to economic development of a
developing country like Bangladesh.

9.4 Development Programmes of Non-government Organisations

Non-government organizations mainly work for reducing poverty. Their work
expands and accelerates during the time of natural calamities. In Bangladesh
many non-government organizations (NGOs) are working to reduce poverty by
giving small loans. Many rural foundations, banks and NGOs are working to
help the government in fulfilling its development plans. the main NGOs of
Bangladesh are BRAC, ASHA, Proshika, Shakti Foundation, Shwanirvar
Bangladesh, TMSS, Karitas, Society for Social Service (SFSS) and Bangladesh
Bureau.

1. BRAC (Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee): Established in 1972,
BRAC is the largest microcredit-giving NGO in Bangladesh. It works in 70
thousand villages and 2000 slums for the empowerment of the poor
specially women and girls.

2. Swanirvar Bangladesh: Swanirvar Bangladesh was established in
1975, At first it worked as an adjunct cell of Bangladesh agriculture and
forestry ministry. It started to work as an NGO for the socio-economic
development of the people from 1985.

3. Proshika: Proshika started to work in a few villages of Dhaka and Comilla
districts from 1975. For economic development of its members Proshika
gave microcredit of taka 5070 crore to | crore to 26 lakh people till 2013
for environment friendly agriculture, irrigation, increase of domestic
animals, bee breeding, fisheries, social forestry, gardening at homes,
production of seeds, small business and in many other sectors,

4. ASA (Association for Social Advancement): It has been carrying out
microcredit programmes since 1992. It has emerged as the largest
self-reliant raicrocredit giving organization in the world now.
144

Economics

Shakti Foundation: It was established in 1992. It gives loans to the poor
women in the slums of large cities such as Dhaka, Chittagong, Rajshahi,
Khulna, Comilla, Bogura, etc. Besides, it also works for the development
of health, business and social welfare of these women.

TMSS (Thengamara Mohila Shabuj Shanga): It is the largest
organization for women development in Bangladesh. This organization
has been working for women to reduce poverty and for the development
of their socio-economic condition since 1980.

SSS (Society for Social Service) : It emerged in 1986 for eradicating
poverty of the poor, neglected and deprived men, women and children for
making them aware of their rights, health, education, and for ensuring
integrated services in order to sustainable social development to happen
in the society. The purpose of this organization is to establish sustainable
development by alleviating poverty of the poor, neglected and
the righi-deprived men and women, children of the society and attaining
rights for them by ensuring their education and health services.

Bangladesh Bureau: This organization has been working with sustainable
rural savings and loan programmes for poverty alleviation of the poor
people. Along with this, the organization is implementing the programmes
about health care, pre-primary education development and empowerment of
women, sanitation, family planning, social, forestry and tree plantation,

disaster management, etc.

9,5 Poverty

Poverty makes a country and its people dependent on others and makes the base

of development weak. So it 1s necessary to know about the concept of poverty,

its extent and how to reduce it.

Concept of Poverty

Poverty is a multi-dimensional and relative matter. The people, who earn less,

consume less, own small amount of wealth, live in less peaceful condition and

consider themselves as powerless and distressed in the society, are generally

20125
Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 145

considered as poor people. In Bangladesh we consider those people as poor who
can not manage necessary calorie and minimum ingredients for living. Thus the
family living under minimum earning limit is considered as poor family. The
poor people who are ultra poor are counted as acute poor people. The extent of
poverty, its rate and prevalence has been presented in the list below:

Table-1
Poverty and Chromic poverty (%) according to calorie intake

Type of poverty 1993/96 2005 2010 2016
National 47.5 40.5 a15 24.3

Poverty Rural 47.1 39.5 35.2 26.4
Urban 49.7 43.2 21.3 18.9

Chronic poverty | National 25.1 19.5 17.6 12.9
Rural 24.6 17.9 21.1 14.9
Urban 27.3 24,4 7.7 7.6

Poverty Trends of Bangladesh
In recent years poverty is measured in Bangladesh as the cost of meeting basic
needs. In this measurement both food and non-food products are included. In

this chapter mainly the formation of income-expenditure survey of 1995/96,
2005, 2010 and 2016 conducted by BBS is presented.

From years 2010 to 2016, percentage of poverty is reduced from 31.5% to
24.3% that means at average annual rate it is reduced by 4.23%. From the years

2010 to 2016 the percentage of chronic poverty is reduced from 17.6% to 12.9%
Le. 4.7%.

Programmes Adopted for Poverty Alleviation

There are many government and non-government (NGO) programmes for the
employment and mcome for the development of poor people. The
government of Bangladesh has undertaken the following programmes to reduce
poverty.

Forma-19, Economics Class 9-10
146 Economics

1. Social Protection Programme

The main challenge of social infrastructural development is to include women,
children and challenged people in the main stream of development
programmes. A total of 64 ongoing programmes are being run under various
ministries for social protection and empowerment. In these programmes provid-
ing cash (special and various pensions), food security, small loans and various
funds are included.

Classification of Social Protection Programmes is given below:
a. Aid programmes through providing cash (various pensions)
b. Aid through providing cash (special)

c. Food security programme

d. Providing small loans for self-employment

A. Various Aid Programmes through Providing Cash

A large part of the poor community of the country consists of elderly people,
widow, women deprived and abandoned by husbands. The Government has
launched allowances for these people, to reduce their poverty. Besides, the
Government has also lauched allowances for freedom fighters in recognition
of their participation in the liberation war.

B. Aid Programmes through Providing Cash (Special)

Some special aid through providing cash is minning under the Social
Welfare Ministry of Bangladesh Government. Some of this type of aids
are: rehabilitation for the acid victims and challenged people, micro credit,
allowance for insolvent disabled people and maternal allowance for poor

mothers, etc.

C. Food Security Programmes

Food security is very important to reduce poverty. To ensure food security,
food for work programme, VGF under Ministry of Food and Disaster
Management, VGD under the Ministry of Woman and Child Affairs of
Bangladesh Government are running.

2025
2025

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 147

D. Providing Small Loans for Self-employment

Creating opportunities for sef-employment is a good way to reduce poverty.
Initiatives have been taken for creating self-employment opportunities under
different Ministries of Bangladesh Government. Along with training in
live- stock raising, poultry farming, pisciculture for the unemployed young men
and women. Microcredit facilities have also been arranged for them. Moreover,
initiatives have been taken to reduce poverty by creating employment
opportunities through organising co-operative societies, and training in
information and communication technology (ICT).

9.6 Unemployment

Defintion of Unemployment

A person who is able and interested to work at current wage rate. but unable to find
a job is called an unemployed person. Some characteristics of an unemployee is
given below:

(1) Unable to get a job at current wage
(2) Interested to work al current wage rate
(3) Deprived of earning

(4) Suffers from economical and emotional stress

Types of Unemployment

1. Seasonal unemployment: This type of unemployment occurs at a certain
time of the year due to natural calamities. For example, rural workers,
who do not have job except the time of planting the seeds and
harvesting, ie. in the period of time when they remain unemployed
during a particular period of time, are called seasonal unemployed workers.

2. Disguised Unemployment: Though it seems that there are a lot of workers
who are employed in the agriculture sector, in reality many of them have
zero marginal productivity. People who have zero marginal productivity
are called disguised unemployed persons. Suppose, a farmer has two bighas
148

Economics

of land. He works alone on that land and produces a certain amount of
crops. If two sons join him, it will seem that three persons are
working. But in reality three of them produce the same amount of crop
that the farmer alone used to produce. So the extra two people have the
zero marginal productivity. The reason for this is that three of them are
dividing the workload of a single persons. Thus these extra two people are
called disguised unemployed persons. Therefore, disguised unemployment
is a situation where it seems people are working but actually they have
zero marginal productivity.

Temporary Unemployment: Unemployment created due to change of
profession is called temporary unemployment. Such as a garment worker
starts a business after changing profession. At that time he remains jobless.
This time is considered as temporary unemployment. This type of
unemployment prevails in our country.

So, it is due to lack of work except for farming in the rural society of
Bangladesh, various types of unemployment mentioned above are scen.

Reduction of Unemployment

For the reduction of unemployment, development in agriculture and

non-agriculture sector is necessary. Huge scope for creating new sectors of

employment lies in agricultural improvement in irrigation, cultrvation of more

than one crop, different types of agro-based activities like raising cattle,
forestation, raising poultry, fisheries, etc. In the non-agricultural sector, there are
possibilities of employment in construction of roads, housing, expansion in
small and cottage industries, small businesses, etc. Other than these, it 1s
possible to reduce unemployment by taking the following steps.

i.

Reduction of Disguised Unemployment: Disguised unemployment
exists in the agriculture sector of less developed countries. To reduce
this unemployment, higher wages can be given to workers of
manufacturing sectors so that labor supply in manufacturing sector
increases. Thus excess labor from agriculture will shift to the manufacturing
sector.

2023
2025

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 149

2.

Investing Capital and Reducing Unemployment: For the reduction of
unemployment if more capital is invested in manufacturing sector the
marginal productivity of labourers will increase and thus employment will
also increase.

Establishment of Small and Cottage industries for Producing
Equipment of Farming: Small equipment that is necessary for
farming can be produced in small and cottage industries. And
establishment of these types of industries in rural areas will reduce
unemployment.

Establishment of Industries Based on Agriculture in Rural Areas:
The establishment of Industries based on Agriculture in Rural Areas will
increase employment in these industries which will increase the
production and employment in agriculture. That is, unemployment will be
reduced.

Growing Multiple Crops: Apart from growing only seasonal crops if
other crops are also grown at the remaining times or if one crop is grown
after another, no agricultural labourer will remain unemployed.

Farming Other Than Crops: In most of the areas in Bangladesh there
are lots of rivers, ponds and other low lands. In these places lots of

fisheries can be established. On the other hand, in the high lands, where
crops cannot be grown, poultry can be built.

Compulsory Work-Oriented Education Policy: To solve the unemployment
problem ina country like Bangladesh, education policy must be changed.
Technical and practical training should be given at all levels to increase
the employment in agriculture and manufacturing. Technical and
vocational institutes should be established in every district to create the
opportunities for the less educated people.

Proving Enough Loans: After technical and vocational training if loans
are given to the rural half-literate people, it would be easier to raise
poultry firms, fisheries and animal breeding firms to reduce
150 Economics

unemployment. It can also be solved by establishing small and cottage
industries.

Case study : Make an investigative report on the unemployment condition of
your area.

9.7 Human Resource

Human resource is very important for economic development. It is required in
every sector of development and technology. The value of efficient and trained.
human resource is very high. So, for the development of all developed and

developing counties, the need and importance of human resources are very high.

Definition of Human Resource

The part of population which is included in the labor force through proper
education and efficiency is called human resource. But land and capital of a
country are called tangible resources. The supply of human resources is required
for the utilization of natural resources for economic development. For economic
development, both tangible and human resources are necessary. Increasing
working capability and efficiency through proper education, training, healthy
dwelling places, treatment, etc. is called development of human resources.
Efficient human resource is a necessary element for economic development.

Methods of Human Resource Development

For economic development, il is necessary to increase the quality of human
resource. For this purpose the following steps can be taken:

1. Education: To make people active and efficient, it is necessary to expand
education and technical education. Education is necessary for private
and national development. Therefore, it is necessary to change the whole
education system and encourage vocational education. A person can be
illiterate but if they are given technical education, their human resource is
improved, An illiterate person being good and efficient farmer can increase
the production. Developing countries like Bangladesh lack vocational
or technical education. So, it is necessary to increase technical education

2025
2025

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 151

everywhere. For this purpose, the number of technical education institutes
is to be increased and their standards are to be improved. People educated
with technical knowledge can apply their learning im real life.

2. Training: Educated and trained people of a country are able to increase
the production more. It is not possible to develop the quality of a
person who is not trained. Training is necessary for human resource
development. If trained people are utilized in more technical work, high
returms are possible. Moreover, trained people can take immediate and
timely decisions for some work and bring good returns.

3. Development of Public Health: Balanced diet, healthy environment,
etc. are the basic requirements for maintaining good health. Every person
in the country should be introduced to these requirements. It is possible to
improve the health condition of those people that have poor health,
physical weakness and reluctance to work by offering medical facilities at
any cost.

4. Food and Nutrition: To turn the population power into human resource it
is necessary to make the people aware of balanced diet and nutrition. The
government, political parties, doctors, scientists, farmers, labourers all
should come forward to fulfill this purpose.

5. Proper Dwelling Place: Healthy environment is necessary for increasing
working capacity. A safe and healthy living place increases working
capacity. Therefore, the government should increase the housing facilities
through public and private sectors.

6. Women Empowerment: Human resources development can be achieved
by involving women in the workforce through education and training.
Half of the total population in Bangladesh is women. Economic
development is not possible while these people remain at home. It is
possible to increase human resources through technical education and
training to women.
152 Economics

7. Plan for the Development of Human Resource: To increase the working

capacity and quality of human resources of Bangladesh, proper plan and
its implementation is required. Effective steps can be taken to implement
this plan for this purpose. That is, economic development is possible if
human resource is developed.

[The Source of all information in this chapter: Bangladesh Economic Review 2019]

Exercise
Short Questions
1. Explain the concept of economic development and economic growth.
2. Is growth part of development? Explain.
3. Mention 6 characteristics of least developed countries.
4. Mention 6 characteristics of developed countries.

oA MH

What are the obstacles of economic development?
Explain a few names of NGOs.
Explain the concept of poverty.

Mention a few methods of reducing unemployment.

Descriptive Questions

1.

What are the characteristics of least developing countries? Describe.

2. What are the characteristics of developed countries? Describe.
3.
5
6

Describe the main obstacles of economic development.

Discuss in short the programmes undertaken by Bangladesh government for poverty reduction.

Describe the types of unemployment in Bangladesh,

Multiple Choice Questions

I,

What is development?
a. part of growth b. per capita income
c, increase in nationalincome d, development in other sectors with growth

20125
Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 153

2, Asaresult of the instability of prices in agricultural products
i. farmers are reluctant to step up production.
ii. disguised unemployment increases.

ili. small industries increase.
Which of the following is true?
a i b. i andii
¢, iiandii d. i,iand ii
Read the following passage and answer question numbers 3 and 4.

Karim drives a rented autorickshaw. His income from this does not allow him to
save anything after his expenditures on household chores. He is unable to save
money even after driving the autorickshaw for a long time. Finally. he bought a
new autorickshaw for himself by taking a loan from the bank.

7

3. Which concept of economics is Karim’s situation related to?
a, trend of poverty b. reduction of poverty

c. vicious cycle of poverty d. decrease in poverty

4. By buying a new autorickshaw Karim's
i. unemployment problem will be solved.
ii. capital will be generated.

iii. consumption will be increased.

Which of the following is true?
a i b. ii

c& iband ti c. land ii

Forma-20,. Economics Class 9-10
154 Economics
Creative Questions
1;

=

‘3

a

E

3

&

3

i=")

o

4

XK

ao F B

o Ff Pp

=

Source ; Bangladesh Economic Review (June/12)

What is human resource?

Explain the concept of vicious cycle of poverty.

Which characteristics of the economy does the graph show? Explain

What driving force, you think, is most responsible for the economic condition
shown in the graph? Explain.

Tamanna has done her M.A. from National University. But she is still
unable to find a job. Nowadays she helps her mother in handicrafts. She
passes a good time with her mother but their production or income from the
work is the same as before.

What is unemployment?
Explain the programme Food for Work.
Explain the type of work Tamanna does according to economics.

Technical education can improve the situation of Tamanna. Explain.

2025
