Chapter Five
Food, Nutrition and Digestion

Living organisms live on food. Food ts essential to survive. But the process of
consuming food is different in plants and animals. Different elements are
necessary for the nutrition of living organisms. In this chapter, food, nutrition
and digestion in the human body and plant nutrition are discussed,

2025
£23

©« the end of this chapter, we will be able to-

* explain the necessity of essential clements for plant nutrition;

analyse nutrition deficiency symptoms in plants;

describe the main components of animal foods and their sources;

explain the ideal food pyramid;

explain the principles of consuming foods;

explain the symptoms, remedies and prevention of nutrition deficiency
diseases:

explain kilocalories and kilojoules;

explain the amount of energy in nutrients and their conversion in calorie and joule;
explain the importance of body mass index (BMT) and body mass ratio
(BMR);

determine BMI and BMR;

determine the relation between BMR and energy spent;

determine how BMI differs according to the age and sex;

explain the importance of exercise and rest for good health;

explain the necessity of using chemicals in preserving foods:

analyse the effect of using excessive chemicals and colours in food on the human
body;

describe the structure and functions of the alimentary canal along with accessory
glands:

draw a labeled diagram of the main parts of alimentary canal;

explain the functions of the liver;

explain the functions of the pancreas;

evaluate the role of enzymes in digestion;

describe the different symptoms, remedies and prevention of different intestinal
diseases;

make yourself and other family members aware about intestinal diseases for
healthy living;

make a list of food consumed in last seven days and compare with the balanced
food,

draw a poster to raise awareness among people regarding the contribution of
nutrition to healthy living;

make yourself and others aware about the contribution of nutrition to healthy
living.
5.1 Plant Mineral Nutrition

Plants absorb certain elements from the soil, air and water for growth and
nutrition, Plants can not live without these elements. These elements are called
nutrients. As most nutrients are taken from the soil, they are called mineral
nutrition. About 60 inorganic nutritional elements have been identified in plants.
Only 16 nutrients out of 60 are essential for the normal growth of plants. These
16 nutrients are collectively called essential elements because they are required
for the normal growth. physiological activities and reproduction of all types of
plants. Deficiency of any of these elements results in deficiency symptoms in
plants, and causes diseases in them. One element cannot be substituted by
another element.

Of these 16 nutrients, some are consumed in large amounts and others in low
amounts by plants. Based on the amount of essential mineral nutrition consumed
by plants, nutrients are divided into two groups; macro-nutrient (or macro-
element) and micro-nutrient (or micro-element).

(a) Macronutrient or macro clement: The nutrient elements, which are
consumed by plants in large quantities for growth, are called macronutrients
ar macroclements. Plants use 9 macronutrients or macro elements: they are
Nitrogen (N), Potassium (K), Phosphorus (P), Calcium (Ca), Magnesium
(Mg), Carbon (C), Hydrogen (H), Oxygen (0) and Sulfur (S).

(b) Micronutrient or microelement: The elements which are consumed in
very small quantities required for the normal growth of plants are called
micronutrients or microelements. Plants use 7 micronutrients: they are Zinc
(Zn), Manganese (Mn), Molybdenum (Mo), Boron (B), Copper (Cu) and
Chlorine (Cl) and Iron (Fe).

5.1.1 Source and Role of Nutrients

Source of Nutrients: Plants absorb carbon and oxygen from the atmosphere
and hydrogen and oxygen from water. Other elements are absorbed from the
soil through roots. These elements are found in the soil in the form of different
salts. Plants cannot absorb them as salis directly. They are absorbed in ionic
form, such as Ca‘’, Mg"’, NH,'. NO,, K" etc.

2025
2025

The Role of different mineral clements in plant nutrition: Mineral nutrients
play a very important role in the normal growth of plants. The role of some
macronutrients are mentioned below.

Nitrogen : Nitrogen is an essential element of nucleic acid, proteins and
chlorophyll. Nitrogen plays a very important role in general growth of plants and
increases the amount of water in plant tissues. The formation of chlorophyll is
hindered if there is a shortage of nitrogen. If the formation of chlorophyll is
hindered, the production of food affected. And if the production of food is
interrupted, the release of energy through respiration will be lessened.
Magnesium : Magnesium is an important component of chlorophyll and helps
the process of respiration. If there is a shortage of magnesium in a plant, the
formation of chlorophyll molecule and the production of food through
photosynthesis will be hampered.

Potassium : Potassium helps in many biological reaction of plants. It also plays
an important role in opening and closing stomata. Potassium helps a plant absorb
water. In addition, it helps the development and growth of roots, flower and
fruits. Potassium also controls the growth of plants through cell division.
Phosphorous : Phosphorous is essential for the development of roots.
Tt is the structural component of DNA, RNA and ATP in living cells. So, without
phosphorous, nutrition of plants is not possible. Phosphorous is also an essential
element for the elongation of roots.

Iron : [ron is the structural component of cytochrome, and so it is required for
aerobic respiration. Iron also plays an important role in the formation of
chlorophyll.

Because of their role in nutrition, chemical fertilizers such as urea for nitrogen,
muriate of potash for potassium chloride, and triple super phosphate for
phosphorus are used in cultivating fields for high yields.

Micronutrients also plays an important role for the normal growth of plants. For
instance :

Manganese : Manganese is needed to construct and maintain chloroplasts.
Copper : Copper plays an important role in the respiration process. It plays an
important role in tomato and sunflower plant for their normal growth,

Boron : Boron is required for the active growing regions of plants, and it also
plays a role in the transportation of sugar.

Molybdenum : Molybdenum is essential for the fixation of nitrogen by microorganisins.
Chlorine : Chlorme is necessary for the growth of root and stem of sugar beet.
86 Biology

5.1.2 Symptoms of Nutrient Deficiencies: In case of the deficiency of any
nutrients, symptoms are visible in plants. These symptoms are called deficiency
symptoms. By observing these symptoms we can understand which nutrient is
deficient in which plant. Some deficiency symploms associated with several
nutrients are mentioned below,

Deficiency symptoms Diseased Plant

Nitrogen (N): The formation of chlorophyll is
inhibited if the deficiency of nitrogen occurs in a
plant. Because of this, green leaves gradually turn
yellow. Without chlorophyll, other pigments also
appear yellow, The condition of leaves becoming
yellow is called chlorosis, Deficiency of iron,
manganese or copper may also cause chlorosis as
they are also responsible for the preduction of
chlorophyll in various ways. Due to chlorosis the
growth and division of cells is decreased and
ultimately the total growth of a plant is reduced.
The figures show leaves with nitrogen deficiency
and healthy leaves.

Phosphorus (P): Leaves turn purple if a deficiency
of phosphorus occurs in them. Necrotic spots
develop in the leaves. Shedding of leaves, flowers
and fruits may occur. The growth of plant collapses
and the plant becomes stunted. Plants usually display
no obvious early symptoms of phosphorus deficiency.
By the time a visual deficiency is recognized, il may
be too late to take any action.

Potassium (x): In deficiency of potassium, the tip
and the blade of leaf turn yellow and necrotic spots
are developed, Interveinal chlorosis occurs. Leaves
may wilt and look scorched along the leaf margin.
The growth of the plant is reduced, and apical and

lateral buds die.

2023
2025

ood, Nutrition and Digestion

Calcium (Ca): The normal level of calcium in the
eytosol of the cell is related to the functioning of
mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum. [If the level
decreases, oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria, as
well as the protein trafficking process in endoplasmic
reticulum, is hampered. Young leaves face chlorosis due
to deficiency of calcium, and the growing apical parts of a
plant die. At the ime of flowering in plants, stems dry up
and the plants wilt.

Magnesium (Mg): Chlorophyll is not synthesized if there
isa deficiency of magnesium, so the green colour gets paler
and the rate of photosynthesis is reduced. Chlorosis occurs
deeply and rapidly in the middle places of the veins.

Iron (Fe): If there is a deficiency of iron, young leaves
first turn pale. It also causes yellowing of young leaves,
starting between the leaf veins and resulting in chlorosis.
Sometimes the whole leaf becomes pale. The stem gets
weak and short.

Sulpher ($): Sulpher not only serves as a structural
component of protein, hormones and vitamins but also
maintains the balance of water in cell. Leaves show
general chlorosis, and reddish and purple spots appear
on them. Chlorosis happens more with young leaves
and less in old ones. The tissue of the leaves, stems and
root die gradually from tips to the bottom. due to
deficiency of sulpher, This is called die back,
Inter-nodes of stems become short, and consequently
the plant becomes stunted.

Boron (B): Boron gives strength to a cell by being
inside the cell wall. It also regulates various reactions
in the metabolism process. Necrosis of meristematic
lissue in growing regions occurs when there is a
deficiency of boron. The growth of young leaves is
inhibited and the leaves lose their proper shape. the
stem becomes brittle, rupturing their surface. The
initiation of floral bud is obstructed.

Activity: The teacher will ask the students to prepare a chart stating the
different deficiency symptoms of different mineral nutrients.

5.2 Food and Nutrition of Animal

You have learned in Class six and eight that food is essential for life. In the same
way, 4 balanced diet is necessary for good health. When oxidized, foods produce
heat and energy in the body. In the previous chapter, you learned how heat and
energy are produced by chemical reactions in the respiration process. From the
beginning to the end of life, the influence of chentical reactions is endless. To
move, play or do other activities energy is necessary. We get this energy from
food. The substances which are digested and absorbed within the body and help
in repairing itself, staying healthy, supplies nourishment for vital activities,
protect from diseases and produce heat and energy, are called food.

5.2.1 Components of food and their sources; All the above mentioned tasks are
essential for our living. Different types of food are necessary to perform these
tasks properly. Foods are the chemical combination of many compounds. These
chemical substances are the ingredients of food. Nutrition exists within these
ingredients and are called nutrients. Most of the foods contain more than one
nutrient, but they are classified into the category of the nutrient that is present in
greater quantity compared to other nutrients in that food. Depending on the
principle of ingredients. foods are divided into three classes:

a. Protein : Helpsin growth and repair,

b. Carbohydrate: Helps in producing energy.

c. Fat and oils: Produces heat and energy.

Besides these, three other components are essential for the body :

d. Vitamins: Increases immunity power and enhances chemical reactions.

e. Minerals: Takes part in various biological functions.

f. Water: Keeps the balance of water and temperature. Regulates cell activity and
contains organelles.

f025
There is also another component. Although it is not a nutrient, it is nevertheless an

important component of our diet.
g. Fiber or Roughage: Roughage absorbs water, increases the amount of stool, and
helps in bowel function,

(a) Proteins: Proteins are composed of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen.
There are 16% nitrogen in Protein. Sulpher, phosphorus and iron are also present
in small quantities. Due to the presence of nitrogen, sulpher, phosphorus and
iron, the importance of protein is different from carbohydrate and fat. Protein is
the only source of nitrogen. That is why it is considered an important component.

Sources of Protein : We have learned earlier that we get protein from fish, meat,
eggs, milk, pulse, dried fish, bean seed, nuts etc. Proteins are of two kinds:
1) Animal protein and 2) Plant protein.

Animal protein: Fish, meat, eggs, cheese,
posset, liver are the sources of animal protein.
Amino acids, which are essential for the
body, can be found in these foods.

Plant protein: Pulses (dal), nuts, bean
seeds etc, are the sources of plant proteins.
Once it was thought that these are less
nutritious, because plant protein does not
contain all the essential amino acid. In fact,
like animal proteins, plant proteins contain
all amino acids in sufficient amounis. Figure - 5.01 : Proteins
Sometimes two or more plant proteins are

cooked together. But this does not have any

significant effect on the proportion of amino

acids.

Forma-12, Biology Class-9-10
(b) Carbohydrates: Carbohydrates are the main sources of energy. They are
composed of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. Carbohydrates are deposited in
roots, stems, flowers and seeds in different forms. Glucose in fruit juice, lactose
in milk, starch in wheat, potato, rice etc. are different forms of carbohydrates.
According to composition, carbohydrates are of three types.The formation and
composition of three types of carbohydrates are shown in the table below.

Table 10,2: Classification of carbohydrates.

Carbohydrates Composition ‘Example Sources

Mono-saccharide | One molecule of | Glucose Honey, fruit juice.
Carbohydrate

Di-saccharide Two molecules of Sucrose,lactose. | Sugar and milk.
Carbohydrate

Poly-saccharide | Many molecules of | Carbohydrate. Rice, ala, potato,
Carbohydrate glycogen. green vegetables

We mostly get carbohydrates from rice, wheat, and potato. In raw form
carbohydrates cannot be easily digested. That is why we eat foods like potato,
rice, wheat etc. after cooking. Carbohydrates

are then digested and turned into glucose.
Di-saccharides and poly saccharides turn
into simple carbohydrates (glucose) through
digestion and become ready for absorption.
For human nutrition, simple carbohydrates
are very important. The human body can
only absorb glucose. Figure: 5.02 Carboliydrates
(c) Fats: Fat is an essential component of food. It is composed of carbon, hydrogen
and oxygen and iis main function is to produce heat. It remains in the stomach for a
long time, so we do not feel hungry. Fat is stored beneath the skin. It is also stored
in various organs, such as, in the liver, brain and museles, These stored fats are
used when food is not available. It contains more than twice as many calories as
carbohydrates and proteins.

The calorie is the measuring unit of energy in food. Food, cooked with oil or ghee,
makes the food tasty. At the same time it also increases the nutritional value, such
as, fried potato instead of boiled potato, luchi or porota instead of roti are not only
tasty but also contain more calories. Some fats contain vitamin 'A’, some contain
vitamin 'E',

2025
£23

According to the sources, fats are of two kinds, such as - 1) Vegetable fat and
2) Animal fat.

1) Vegetable fat : Soyabean, mustard, sesame,
nuts, sunflower and corm oils are used as
vegetables oils. Among them soyabean oil is
the best one.

2) Animal fats : Fats, ghee, dalda etc. are
animal fats. Ege yolk contains fat but the
white part of the egg does not. Fats are

insoluble in water. Fat floats on water

because it is lighter than water. The daily Figure: 5.03 Fats
requirement of a healthy adult person is

50-60 om of fat,

(d) Vitamins: Very small amount of vitamins is needed for health; even so, its
importance is unlimited. To grow and to remain healthy vitamins are absolutely
necessary. A balanced diet contains different types of nutrients, so sufficient
vitamins can be obtained from a balanced diet. The absence of vitamins in
regular diet causes vitamin-deficiency diseases. It can even cause severe
harmful effects on the body, or even death. Vitamins are of two types, as : 1) Fat
soluble vitamins and 2) Water soluble vitamins. Vitamin 'A', 'D', 'E' and 'K' are
soluble in fat and vitamin B-complex and vitamin 'C’ are soluble in water.

Fat soluble vitamins
Vitamin A: Vitamin A is obtained from milk, butter, fats, eggs, carrot, mango,

jack fruit, coloured vegetables, mola fish ete.

Vitamin D: Milk, eggs, liver, dairy products, fish oil, edible oil etc. are the
sources of vitamin D.

Vitamin E & K: Vitamin E and vitamin K can be obtained from all the above
mentioned foods.
Water soluble vitamins

Vitamin B: Yeast, husking rice, red ata, sprout gram, peas, cauliflower, pea nut,
beans, liver, heart. milk, eggs, meat, green vegetables etc. are the sources of vitamin B.
Vitamin C: Vitamin C can be obtained from guava, pomelo, star fruit, orange,
cabbage, tomato, pineapple, green chili, fresh vegetables etc.

(ec) Mineral salts or Minerals: Mineral salts are essential for body cells and
body fluids. The human body contaims mineral salts, such as: calcium, iron,
sulphur, zine, sodium, potassium, iodine etc. These ingredients do not exist as
stand-alone elements. These elements are in food and the body as a compound
with other elements, forming various organic and inorganic salts. Mineral salts
regulate body building and internal functions.

Mineral salts are the most essential elements in the formation of teeth, muscles, bones,
enzymes and hormones. They play a particular role in nerve impulses, muscle
contraction, maintaining water balance in body cells, and keeping balance of acid and
base.

Milk, curd, cheese, small fishes (mola-dhela), pulses, green vegetables, red
leaves, arum leaves etc. are sources of calcium. Liver, green vegetables, meat,
eg@ yolk, arum leaves contain iron. Phosphorous is obtained from milk, fish,
meat, nuts, pulses. Table salt, chips, salty food, cheese, nuts, pickles etc. contain
sodium. Fish, meat, nuts, pulses, banana, potatoes, carrots, apples etc. contain
potassium. The sources of iodine are sea weeds, sea fish, meat and algae.

(f) Water: The other name of water is life. For the existence of life, Water is just
as important as oxygen. Water is the most essential component for nutrition.
Body building and internal functions are not possible without water. There are
three functions of water: (1) Body formation (2) Control of internal functions
and (3) Elimination of waste products.

(1) Body formation: Body formation and maintenance cannot be possible
without water. At least 50-65% of body weight of the human body is water.

(2) Control of internal functions: No chemical reaction can occur inside the
body without water, It acts as a solvent. Blood transport is possible only because
of water, Nutrients from digested food in blood and oxygen are carried to the cells
through water. Mineral salts remain dissolved in body fluid. Nutrients from
digested food, dissolved into water, are absorbed into blood through the small
intestine.

2025
2025

(3) Elimination of waste products: Water helps to remove waste products from
the body, A large amount of water leaves the body with urine, stools, sweat etc.

The demand of water for the body depends on the person’s age, labour, food habits
and environmental conditions.

(g) Fiber or Roughage: Dietary fiber or roughage is found in the outer covering
of cereals, vegetables, skin of fruits, endosperm, seeds, roots, leaves, stem of
plants, etc. These are the cellulose and lignin of cell walls. The way bones make
up the structure of the body, likewise cellulose and roughage make up the
structure of plants. These are complex carbohydrates. While human beings cannot
digest cellulose, cows, goats and buffalo can. Roughage absorbs water, increases
the amount of feces and helps to elimimate stools. Roughage enriched food also
absorbs harmful products from the intestine. It is assumed that roughage reduces
the risk of cancer to some extent. Roughage plays a role in reducing obesity, the
tendency of fat deposition, and hunger.

5.2.2 An Ideal Food Pyramid

A balanced diet includes carbohydrates, vitamins and minerals, protein, fats or
oils. Lf we observe a balanced food chart of a teenage boy or yirl, or an adult
male or female, we may find that carbohydrates have the most highest presence
in the list. Placing carbohydrates at the bottom and considering the quantities
of vegetables, fruits, proteins, fats and oils successively, if we arrange these
substances in successive tiers, it looks like a pyramid. This is called the ideal
food pyramid. This diagram shows carbohydrates at the base and fats and oils
at the apex.

The necessary foods that we eat daily, are shown in the form of pyramid
(Fig: 5.04). You may notice the highest quantity is at the base and the lowest
quantity is at the apex. We should eat carbohydrates in a large quantity as the
largest level at the base indicates rice. potato, bread etc. Vegetables. fruits are
placed in the next tier. These substances should be eaten in less than
carbohydrates.
Fish, meat, eggs, milk, pulses, cheese, possel, curds should be eaten in lesser
quantities than [ruits and vegetables, Sweets, fat and oil should be eaten the least.
We have to choose what we eat according to the food pyramid, and then we will
be able to eat a balanced diet. Generally we eat tasty foods the most. This habit is
not good for health. So we should make a habit of eating food in moderation.

3
Fats group G >

Vitamin and Mineral
group

Protein group

aa
| ed | Carbohydrates group
Figure-5.04: Ideal food pyramid

§.2.3 Principles of Food Habit

Selection of food or a balanced diet is a precondition for healthy living. Every
body should know the rules of healthy cating because then it becomes simpler to
fulfill the demands of family members taking into account food selection, food
calories, family income ete.

2025
2025

Characteristics of balanced diet

1. People should have the ability to produce adequate energy through metabolism.

2. Protein, fats and carbohydrates should be eaten proportionately.

3. Include fresh fruits and vegetables in the diet for the supply of necessary
vitamins, roughage or cellulose.

4. There must be sufficient water and minerals.

5. The diet must be easily digestible.

There is no alternative to a balanced diet fora healthy life. For a well developed
body it is important to make a food chart or menu by including foods that contain
Six ingredients. A realistic menu can be prepared if the demands of the body,
availability of food and family income are taken into consideration while selecting
items or planning the menu. A menu can be made or chalked out by selecting the
low cost food that contains the equal or same food value. Selecting low cost food,
that contains equal food value (instead of costly food) is a good practice.

Preparing a balanced food chart
In order to prepare a balanced food chart, some issues should be taken into
consideration. For instance-

. Person's sex, age, occupation and health condition.
. Knowledge about food value.
. Presence of adequate protein supply for repairing and body building.
. Presence of adequate amount of vitamins, minerals and water.
. Knowledge regarding climate, weather and food habit.
. Economic condition of the family and number of fanuly members.
Observe the table mentioned below. You will learn about the amount of food needed
for male and female persons of different age.

oOo tn se Ga he ee

Table (A) Food chart for adult male and female

In order to get the required amount of calories per day, adult males or females should
consume food mentioned in the following chart. Pregnant and nursing mothers need
extra food, Young children may eat less food according to their age.
Adult male Adult female
Name of food, Without | Moderate) Hard Without) Moderate) Hard
grains work working | working work working | working
(gm) (gm) (gm) (gm) (gm) (gm)
Bean/kidney 20 25 30 20 22.5 23
bean
Egalfish/meat | Onef30gm | One/30gm | One/30gm | One/J0gm | One/30em | One/30gm
Leafy 40 40 40 100 100 150
vegetables
Other 60 70 80 40) 40 100
vevetables
potato 50 60 80 50 50 60
Milk 150 200 250) 100 150 200
Fat/oils 45 50 70 25 30 45
Sugar/molasses 30 35 35 20 20 40

Table B: General food value/nutritional value of some food in Bangladesh

This table has been prepared on the basis of food value or nutritional value of
food grains in Bangladesh. This is published and accepted by the Institute of
Nutrition and Food Science (INFS, 1975). Calories have been determined for
every 100 gms edible part of food. How to determine calorie value is discussed
in this chapter.

Name of Energy
food grains kilocalorie
Rice 346
Wheat (ata) 34]
Gram 360
Lentil (dal) 343
Carrot 48
Patato oF
Water Spinach (Kalmi shak) 28
Basella 26
Pumpkin (small) 60

2025
©) maria

Name of Energy

food grains kilocalorie
Brinjal 24
Cauliflower 30
Cabbage ar
Kidney bean 26
Bean o6
Hilsha fish 273
Catla fish 111
Prawn 89
Beef meat 114
Egg 173
Chicken 109
Mutton 194
Milk (Cow's mill) 67
Milk (Mother’s mill) 65
Ghee (from Cow's milk) 900
Cooking oil 900

vidual serait

(9

| Activity: Prepare a food list of carbohydrates, proteins and fats from the list above,

Additional matters that should be of special consideration-

> Maintain cleanliness while preparing food, serving, and eating food.

> Drink sufficient water daily. Water must be boiled before drinking.

» Make a habit of eating seasonal fruits, fresh vegetables. These must be included

in daily food chart. Avoid canned and frozen vegetables.

@.

( Activity: Students will make a food chart which he/she has been taken for the \

__ last 7 days and compare it with the balanced diet and place it in the class room.

Forma-13, Biology Class-9-10

|
98 Biology

5.3 Vitamin deficiency diseases

(a) Goiter: In the conventional scenes goiter
indicates any kind of swelling of the thyroid
gland, but according to medical science all
swellings of the thyroid gland are not
goiters. The thyroid can be enlarged
abnormally due to tumours, cancer or other
inflammation but these are not goiters.
Again, goiter does mot indicate any
particular disease of the thyroid; rather it is a
general symptom for different diseases
related to thyroid. Goiter can be caused for |)
various reasons. A deficiency of iodine in
food is one of the main reasons of goiter.

There is less iodine in the soil of the regions that are away from the sea, such as
North Bengal and hilly areas. So people of these regions tend to suffer more
from this disease.

(b) Night blindness: The disease Xerophthalmia occurs due to the deficiency of
vitamin A. If the deficiency is not treated, the level and intensity of the disease
increases. There are seven to eight levels of xerophthalmia and night blindness
is the lowest level. Generally, 2-5 year old children suffer from this disease.
The sensory rod célls of the eyes get damaged. The patient can not see in dim
light. Everything seems to be hazy. [f the disease worsens, the cornea turns
cloudy. These are the symptoms of night blindness. Starting from night
blindness, the fourth to fifth level of xerophthalmia can be cured by applying
vitamin A supplements and medicines. If the disease becomes acute, there is no
other alternative but surgical intervention or corneal transplant. Vitamin 'A’
enriched food, such as, fish liver oil, liver, green vegetables, yellow and orange
fruits and vegetables (ripe mango, banana, sweet pumpkin, carrot etc.) mola and
dhela fish, or if necessary vitamin A capsule should be taken to prevent the
disease.

(c) Rickets: This is not a viral or bacterial disease. Deficiency of vitamin 'D' is
the cause of this disease. This vitamin is essential for the absorption of calctum
and phosphorous in the intestine, formation of teeth and bones. Milk, butter.
eggs, cod liver oil are the sources of vitamin 'D'. Cholesterol stored in human

2025
£23

skin can also produce vitamin D with the help of ultra violet ray of the sun, but in
that case, the last stage of producing vitamin D occurs in the kidneys. The
symptoms of this disease are weakening of the bones, swelling of the joints, and
bending of the bones, especially the leg bones. This structure of the body can not
be maintamed, as bones become brittle and the thorax turns narrow. It is

necessary to feed children vitamin 'D' enriched food. It is wise to keep new born
babies in sunlight, keeping the eyes and reproductive organs covered. A
deficiency of vitamin D may occur if the whole body remains covered with dark
or black clothes regularly or if one stay indoors for a long period of time,

(d) Anemia: Anemia is a general disease often occurring in children and females
in our country. Anemia occurs when the density of haemoglobin is less than
normal with respect to age and gender. This disease occurs due to the deficiency
of the essential elements of food like iron, folic acid, or vitamin B-12. There are
many causes of anemia and it may occur even without the deficiency of any
nutrients. The deficiency of iron based protein is the general cause of anemia in
Bangladesh. Children, women of reproductive age group (15 —45 years) and
pregnant mothers often suffer from this disease. There may be various causes of
having iron deficiency anemia, such as - excessive blood loss, worms, shortage
of iron in food for growing children and pregnant mothers, obstruction in
absorption of iron based food, or infection in intestine. Symptoms of this disease
are: fecling weak, headache, depression, insomnia, loss of appetite, palpitation,
vision suddenly goes dark.

To prevent this disease, eating iron enriched food, such as : kidney bean, liver,
meat, eggs, peanut. lentile, vegetables, molasses etc. is necessary. If anemia is
due to the infection of worms in the intestine, the patient needs to take worm
destroying drugs. If necessary, this disease can be prevented by taking iron
supplements under doctors’ adviee. Giving treatment of anemia without doctors’
advice may be dangerous because there are some cases of anemia (like
thalassemia) where taking a normal dose of iron supplements or food may
worsen the condition of the patient. So it is necessary to diagnose the disease
properly before treating the anemia.
4h)

_ Activity: Draw a poster regarding the contribution of nutrition to healthy living. —

5.4 Energy in food ingredients

We know that food gives us nutrition and energy. But da we know what amount
of food gives us what amount of energy? Is the energy yielded by different
nutrients the same? Among the six nutrients, only proteins, carbohydrates and
fats can produce energy. The other three ingredients can not.

Muscles of our body help in movement and locomotion. We can do any work
because of our muscles, such as : moving, walking, rmning, sitting etc. How
much energy is spent to do these activities? Energy consumption depends on
muscle contraction and relaxation. The more the niuscles will contract or
expand, the more energy will be spent,

The consumption of energy depends on work. So, is energy required if we do not
walk or move? If we do not perform any work. only pass our time idly, we still
need food. We feel hungry. Energy is also spent when resting, How does it
happen? When taking rest our external organs, like-hand, legs do not work. But
during respiration. our heart continues to work. So all the muscles. involved in
these functions, contract and relax to perform work as a whole, so
consumption of energy still goes on. This energy is called basic metabolic energy.
How much energy is required for a person depends on three factors. (1) Basic
metabolic rate (2) Type of daily physical labour and (3) Influence of food. The
demand for calories also depends on body growth, physical condition and
climate.

2025
2025

101

5.4.1 Standard unit to Calculate Food Energy

You know that there are various forms of energy. The energy released from food
is heat energy. The unit to measure heat energy is the calorie. According to
Physics, 1000 calorie or | kilocalorie is required to increase the temperature of |
kilogram (1000 gram) by | degree centigrade. Nutritionists also use the word
calorie to indicate food energy, but food calorie, in fact, is kilocalorie. To avoid
any confusion, the word food calorie or kilocalorie has been used in this book.

According to international standards ‘kilojoule’ should be used instead of
kilocalorie. In this case | food calorie=1 kilocalorie = 4.2 kilojoule (approx).

5.4.2 Determining food energy in food nutrients

Every day we consume different types of nutrients, We eat everything starting
from nice, khichuri, polao, from meat to fruits, vegetables, drinks etc. So, to
measure the amount of energy of the nutrients we have to know about the nature
of the foods.

Nature of the nutrients in mixed food and pure foods

Nature of food means whether it is mixed or single food. Mixed food like milk, egg,
khichuri, and guava contains more than one nutrient. On the other hand, single food
like sugar, glucose contains only one nutrient (only carbohydrate).

Nutrients and determining of its amount
After knowing the nature of the food, we should know which food contains

what nutrients in what amounts. The nutritional constituents, their amounts and
food value can be known from food walue chart.

Determining calorie

After knowing about the ingredients of the food and their amounts, we have to
calculate the calories of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. In this case we
calculate it considering the calorie value of vitamzins, mineral salts and water as
zero. The following table shows the amount of calories per gram of element.

Ingredients/ gm Calorie
Carbohydrate 4
Protein 4
Fat 9

@) ‘Example:

Question: If 20 gm chira contains 15.4 gm carbohydrate (77%), 1.32 gm protein
(6.6%) and 0.24 om fat, what is the calorie of 1 kg chira?

Answer: Let us determine the calorie of 20 gms of chira. According to the table
the same amount of chira contains-

15.4 gm carbon (77%)
1.32 gm protein (6.6%)
0.24 em fats (1.2%)

Then, according to formula :
From 15.4 gm carbon 15.4 = 4= 61.60 food calorie.
From 1.32 gm protein 1.32 * 4=5.28 food calorie.

From 0.24 pm fat 0.24 x 9 = 2.16 food calorie.

Therefore, the net calorie = 69.04 food calorie or 69.04 kilocalorie

So, calorie value of lkg of chira = oo 1000

= 3452 calorie.
Since | kilocalorie = 4.2 kilojoule.

Therefore, 3452 kilocalorie— 14,490 kilojoule (approx).

An adult person usually needs 2000 to 2500 food calorie but this can be more or
less depending on gender or nature of activities. If kilocalorie intake is more than
necessary, it is stored in the body as fat.

(W) tnaividatsctiviy

| Activity: Suppose your daily need is 2000 Idlocalories. Considering
balanced diet, prepare a menu for a day for yourself with the food of your
liking.

2025
2025

5.5 Basal Metabolic Rate(BMR) and Body Mass Index(BMI):

The Basal Metabolic Rate indicates the energy used by human beings at resting
stage. The Body Mass Index indicates the structure of the body and the presence
of fats. So, Body mass index indicates the relation between the height and
deposition of fat of a person of particular age for healthy living and maintaining
good health. To determine a person's sound health and obesity, these two scales
are very important.
§.5.1 Determining BMR value
To calculate BMR value is a bit difficult, its equations are with respect to sex and
age. To get an idea about BMR, Harris Benedict's popular formula is used.
BMR (female) = 655 + (9.6 x weight. kg) + (1.8 x height. cm) - (4.7 x age. year)
BMR (male) = 66+ (13.7 x weight. Ke)+ (5 x height. cm)- (6.8 x age. year)
Suppose a woman is 33 years old, height 165 cm and weight is 94 kg.
So, her BMR = 655 + (9.6 x 94) + (1.8 x 165) - (4.7 x 33)

= 655 + 902.4 + 297 - 155.1

= 1699.3 caloric.
Calorie demand per day can be measured by using the table below,

Physical condition (Calorie |
Not working BME value * 1.2
Light working, playing 2-3 days ina week. BMR value * 1.375
| Working. sufficient playing 2-3 days ina week. BMR value = 1.55
| Working. sufficient playing everyday in a week. BMR value = 1.725
Hard working, sufficient jumping, running and playing. | BMR value x 1.9

Example: If the above mentioned woman is hard working, sufficient playing
every day, and if her BMR is 1699.3, then her calorie demand will be
(1699.3 x 1,725) = 2931.29, That means if the woman consumes around 3000
kilocalorie, she can maintain her weight.

Relation between BMR and energy spent

The value of BMR depends on sex, age, body structure and food habit, It is
observed that the BMR value is balanced with the daily demand of food of our
body. BMR has controls the production of 60-75 percent energy in our body. Our
body gets 10%-12% of energy from taking in food and gets 20%-30% of energy
through physical activities, The BMR value declines with increasing age. Some
people dict to keep the body slim, so the BMR value declines more. As a result
there is no more scope of getting slim by dieting. BMR can be raised or
increased by adequate physical work. Health can be kept sound by following
certain rules.

5.5.2 Determining BMI value
BMI = Body weight (kg)/ height of the body. (meter)?
As for example: A man. having 125 cm (1.25 meter) height and 50 kg weight. has 32 BMI.

BMI scales:

i

Below18.5 Underweight; weight f to be increased by taking

adequate food.

18.5-24.9 Ideal scale for good health.

25-29.9 Overweight, Necessary to decrease body
; weight by physical exercise.

30-34.9 First stage of obesity. Taking selective food and
exercise is necessary.

35-39.9 Second stage of obesity. Taking moderate
; amount of food and exercise is necessary,

ABgYaND Extreme obesity. Possibility of death risk.

doctor's advice necessary.

According to BMI scale, body weight of the above person should be 38 kg. Body
weight can be controlled by consuming accurate nutrition and exercise.

L H Mine Wf t

p ea

rT¢9

W529 25S , ie (abet A5-29.9

Sima k 5.06 Body Mass Index

2025
@) Individual Aetivity

Activity: Calculate your BMR and how many kilocalories you need every
day.

@) Individual Activity

Activity: Calculate your BMI and see if your intake of food and life style
is correct,

| Activity: Find out average BMR and BMI of your class and write a report
on it.

5.6 Exercise and Rest

Everybody should do adequate physical activity to keep the body healthy.
Nowadays obesity is increasing as our physical movement has become restricted
due to the scarcity of playground, excessive intemet addiction. nature of work.
academic pressure, and less physical activity. We are becoming uninterested in
physical activity. So, the body doesn't remain strong and healthy. By doing
adequate physical activity, we can maintain work efficiency of our body. A long
and healthy living is possible by practicing an hour moderate work daily and
taking in adequate food. Excessive body weight can be decreased by physical
exercise. We can prevent diabetes, heart diseases and some kinds of cancer
through physical exercise. There are different types of physical exercise, such
as, athletics, or exercises that make bones and muscles strong. Walking fast,
jogging, running, swimming, playing, cycling etc. are examples of physical
exercise.

Forma-14, Biology Class-9-10
106. Biology

Rest is very important for health. Rest is essential alter physical and mental
work. Lying down and sleeping is a part of rest. After rest different parts of the
body regains energy and stores it. You will be astonished to know that almost all
animals in the living world take rest. This rest is related to the day and night
cycle. Many animals are active in sunlight. Other animals take rest by day and
remain active during the night. when they come out in search of food. These are
called nocturnal animals.

5.7 Use of Chemicals in Food Preservation

Food preservation is a process by which rotting of food can be resisted. As a
result, the properties, acceptability, food value remain intact. Food preservation
prevents the rotting of food by bacteria, fungal infection, or the oxidation of fats.
Fish drying, salted Hilsha, pickle, cooling by ice, fish sidol, prawn nappi etc. are
customary means of food preservation. Modern methods of canning and
smoking processes are also used for preserving food. Healthy, approved
chemical substances are used to preserve food so that decomposing bacteria and
fungal infection do not happen. Generally sodium nitrate, sodium chloride or
table salt, calctum apernate. sulphur di-oxide, sodium-bisulphate, sodium
benzoit. sorbet (Na, K, Ca) are used. These are approved chemicals. Harmful
formalin and various kinds of coloured substances should not be used. because
it can be dangerous.

Adulterant in food and use of colours

Just as a clean environment is necessary to live in this beautiful world, similarly,
eating safe food is essential. Nowadays various harmful and unhealthy chemical
substances and colours are used as adulterants. As a result, public health is now
threatened. If this health risk continues, Bangladeshis will face a great disaster
in course of time just like the Romans. Once upon a time the Romans used water
containers made of lead. As a result, people who drank that water got affected by
poisonous lead and gave birth to a crippled generation. In Bangladesh, various
kinds of adulterants are mixed with the food. Commercial colours, antibiotics,
chemical substances, insecticides, pesticides, formalin, heavy metals are
mentionable. The cattle, fishes, poultry animals etc. which are fed the
unapproved adulterant food, are threatening to human life and health,

2025
£23

Some harmful effects of health risk : Commercial colours used in textile or

for colouring are sometimes used in ice-cream, blended ice cream, candies,
beguni, chop etc.These types of foods gradually affect liver function and cause
various diseases. Bacteria that help in decomposition cannot grow in fish, fruits
and other food stuffs submerged in formalin. So, it looks fresh. Research has
found that formalin forms a compound within cell of the fishes. Even after
frequent washing it remains within the fish body. It enters the human body with
the cooked food. These poisonous compounds are the cause of complex disease
symptoms and may even cause some types of cancer.

Insecticides are used in the storage of food and vegetables. If these are sold
before the effect of the insecticides expires, the poisonous effect on food creates
great health risk. Infants are more affected. Poisonous insecticides have an
adverse effect on their growing cells. So, infants suffer from various types of
illnesses and their mental development is hampered. The list of chemical
substances and adulterants. used in food, are shown in the chart below-

1, Antibiotics Used in fish and cattle food, Only drugs approved by registered
stores in animals body. physicians should be used,

2. Heavy metals | Inedible components used in fish Avoid using inedible
and cattle food (such as-waste of components, such as : waste
tanneries) stores in animal body, products of tannery, coal, soil.
faeces of animals.

3.Commercial /Unapproved colours used in Avoid using — inedible

colours indusities, manufacturing ice-cream, components, such as ; waste
blended ice-cream, artificial juice, products of tannery,coal, soil,
coloured drinks, producing sweet, faeces of aniinals

meat chop ete. ‘

4. Formalin Mainly used to preserve dead Avoid using formalin.
bodies in the morgue,unapproved
use for the preservation of fish,
fruits, milk ete.

4. Insecticides Used as pesticide in vegetables Afier expiry of the effects of
production, but its poisonous poisonous chemials, vegetables
effect exisis in many cases, should be sold. Nol to use
unapproved use of D.D.T in dry | D.D.T. im dry fish.

fish.

6. Chemical Excessive and unapproveduse of Allow the fiuit to ripe
substances chemical substances to mpen naturally, Discourage the use
fruits and tomato. Exessive use| of carbide. Use of suitable
of sorbet in soft drinks and) amount of sorbet.
energy drinks.

7. Microbes At the time of production and) Be ensured of bio-security.
preparation of food, microbes |

can get mixed with the food,

2) Group Work

| Activity: Teacher will make several groups of students and tell them to make a list ‘
_ of harmful effects of eating adulterated food for presentation in the classroom. }

5.8 Digestion

The human body is composed of innumerable cells. To keep it alive and
functioning, it requires food. But most of the time foods are eaten as complex
and organic compounds, The body cells are unable to absorb these directly. So,
to make it absorptionable food is broken down into simple, easy and soluble
form.

Food substances turn absorptionable in two ways, such as—

(1) Mechanical process and (2) Chemical process.

(1) Mechanical process: Teeth help in chewing or miasticating food.
First the food substances break into small pieces. Within the stomach and
intestine these particles turn into pulp.

(2) Chemical process; Chemical process is the second step of digestion. Secretion of
digestive enzymes helps to enhance chemical reaction. So the compounds break into
simple soluble components. Intra cellular reaction also depends on enzymes.
Digestive system: There is a particular system for the digestion of food called
the digestive system, This is the system, by which food substances are broken
down into absorptionable substance for the body and absorbed. The digestive
system consists of the alimentary canal and the digestive glands. Alimentary
canal starts from the mouth to anus.

2025
2025

109

5.8.1 Alimentary System or Alimentary Canal: This is a canal running from
the mouth to the anus. Some parts of this canal are broad, while some are
narrow, The main parts of the canal are:

1, Mouth : The mouth is the starting point of the alimentary canal. It
is a transverse opening below the nostrils and bounded by the lips.

2. Buceal cavity: The buccal cavity contains
teeth. tongue and salivary glands. They helps N

helps to cul, grind and chew food into small
pieces. The functions of the tongue are to
move food around the mouth for mastication |.
and to taste. Salivary gland secrets enzyme. Bisd
These glands are located below the ear, at side pesdenum

of the jaws and below the tongue. Salivary mitBhe rf Cotta

(Cae
juice secreted from the salivary glands Apesdx

contains mucin, which makes the food
slippery helps in swallowing. The secretion Figure: 5.07: Digestive system
containing the enzymes named ptyalin and
moltes takes part in digestion.

Tooth: Fish, reptiles and almost all vertebrates (except mammals) shed and
grow teeth numerous times during their lifetime, but mantmals (such as humans)
grow teeth only twice in their lifetime. Human children have 20 temporary teeth,
or baby teeth, which fall out, followed by eruption of 14-16 teeth in each of the
upper and lower jaw by age 18, for a total of 28-32 permanent teeth.

Retium
Ams

of human

Permanent teeth are of four types, such as :

(a)Incisor —: Incisors are used in cutting and biting food.

(b) Canine : Canines are used for tearing and grasping.

(c) Premolar : These teeth are specialized for crushing and grinding.

(d) Molar =: These teeth are used in crushing, and grinding. The last two
teeth of the gums are called wisdom teeth.

Every adult preson has 8 incisor, 4 canine, 8 premolar and 4 wisdom teeth.
Structure of a tooth: The tooth typically consists of three parts, such as—

(1) Crown: The part above the gum.

(2) Root: The inner part below the gum.
Figure: 5.08 Various types of teeth

(3) Neck: The tooth between the crown Blood
and the root. ;

Each tooth is composed of the following
components:

(a) Dentine: The main part of the tooth
consisis of hard substances.

Crown

(b) Enamel: The crown is covered with

enamel, Enamel is the hardest component
of a tooth. Both Dentine and Enamel are
Contiyerad of eatin Ppaphate, ain Figure: §.09 Longitudinal section of teeth
carbonate and fluoride.
(c) Pulp: Dentine surrounds a pulp cavity with blood vessels (artery and vein),
soft cells and nerves running through it. The blood supply nourishes dentine with
nutrients and oxygen.
(d) Cement: The main part of the tooth dentine is covered with a thin covering,
the cement. The tooth remains attached with the gums by means of this cement.
3. Pharynx : The next part of the buccal cavity is the pharynx. Food passes
to oesophagus through the pharynx.
4, Oesophagus : The tube, stretching from the pharynx to the stomach,
is the oesophagus. Food passes to the stomach through the oesophagus.

5. Stomach: The stomach is a bag like organ located in between the oesophagus

and the small intestine. Its wall is thick and muscular, The inner surface of the
stomach has numerous gastric glands. Continuous contraction and relaxation of

2025
2025

the muscular wall of the stomach turns food material into pulp or semi fluid mass.
called chyme. The juice, secreted from the gastric glands, helps in food digestion.
6. Intestine: The coiled duct, extended from behind the stomach, is the intestine.
Intestine is divided into two parts :
(a) Small intestine: The coiled, long duct which extends from the stomach up to
the large intestine, is called the small intestine. It is divided into three parts:
duodenum, jejunum and ileum. Bile duct from the gall bladder and pancreatic
duct of the pancreas joins just before it, and opens into the duodenum. Bile from
the liver and pancreatic juice from the pancreas and enters the first part of
duodenum. The inner wall of the intestine bears finger like projections called villi.
There are intestinal glands in the inside of the small intestine. The villi absorb the
vast majority of small soluble food molecules produced by digestion.

(b) Large intestine: The region from the end of the ileum to the anus is the large
intestine. It is the wider part of the alimentary canal. The large intestine is divided
into three parts: caecum, colon, and rectum. A small finger-like projection is
connected to the caecum. This is the appendix. Here the undigested part of the
food becomes feces. An important step in the formation of feces is the
fermentation and decomposition of undigested food with the help of bacteria,
the process of which emits gases that cause the foul smell of feces.

7, Anus ; There is an aperture at the end of the alimentary canal. This aperture is
the anus.
5.8.2 Digestive Glands: The glands,
whose secretion takes part in the
digestion of food, are called digestive
glands. The digestive glands in humans
are as follows : Gall Bladder
(a) Salivary glands : There are three
pairs of salivary glands. A pair of duodenum
parotid glands, located in front of and
below each ear, a pair of sub maxillary

glands below the jaw and a pair of sub

lingual glands below the tongue open
into the buceal cavity through Figure: 3.10 Digestive gland
various ducts. Secretion from the

Bile duet
salivary glands is known as saliva. Salivary juice contains water and an enzyme
named ptyalin.

(b) Liver: The liver is situated just below the diaphragm on the right side of the
stomach. It is the largest gland of the body and is deep brown in colour, The right
lobe of the liver is larger than the left lobe. The liver consists of four incomplete
lobes. Each lobe consists of lobules. Each lobule contains numerous cells. These
cells produce bile. Bile is alkaline in nature. Different types of biochemical
reactions take place in the liver. So, it is also called the organic laboratory.
Beneath the liver the gall bladder is attached. It stores bile. Bile is deep green in
colour and of bitter taste. The gall bladder is connected with the bile duct,
pancreas are connected with the pancreatic duct. These two ducts together form
a common duct that opens into the duodenum. It enters into the duodenum
through the pancreatic duct.

_ Activity: Draw a labelled diagram of the alimentary canal and present it to the class. }

Functions of liver: The liver produces bile. The ingredients of bile are mainly
water, bile salt, bile, cholesterol, and mineral salts. It is stored in the gall bladder.
When necessary, the bile passes to the duodenum and takes part indirectly in
digestion. There are no enzymes in the bile. The liver stores excessive ghacose
as glycogen. The bile neutralizes the acidic chyme and creates an alkaline
medium. This is favourable digestion because food is not digested in acidic
medium. The bile breaks fat or oil into minute droplets. So, it becomes easier for
lipase to digest the fats easily. Excessive amino acids are taken to the liver. After
various chemical reactions urea, urie acid, ammonia, nitrogen products are
produced, and these help in the absorption of fats. When blood sugar falls below
the normal level, the glycogen stored in the liver is reconverted into glucose and
transmits to the blood stream. Thus the level of blood glucose remains under
control.

(c) Pancreas: The pancreas is an important mixed gland located obliquely at the
back of the stomach. The pancreas secretes digestive juices as well as hormones
that control the level of glucose. So, the pancreas acts as both an exocrine and
an endocrine gland, The pancreatic juice passes into the duodenum through the
pancreatic duct which joins the coramon bile duct (hepato pancreatic duct).
The pancreas secretes pancreatic juice. It contains the enzymes trypsin, lipase
and amylase. These enzymes helps in the digestion of carbohydrates, proteins
and fats, It maintains an acid-base balance, water balance and controls body
temperature. The pancreas also acts as an endocrine gland and secretes
essential hormones, such as, insulin and glucagon. These two hormones have an
important role in keeping glucose under control and in other physiological
processes.

(d) Gastric glands: The glands in the stomach wall are called gastric glands. The
juice secreted from these glands (trypsin, lipase, amylase) is known as gastric juice.
(e) Intestinal glands: Villi, located in the wall of small intestine. contain
intestinal glands. The secretion of these glands is known as intestinal juice.
5.8.3 Digestion of food

The bio-chemical process, by which larger complex, insoluble, unabsorbable
food substances break into absorbable and soluble simple elements in the
presence of enzymes and hormones is called digestion. First, food substances
break into a simple soluble form, and then it diffuses through the cell membrane
and enters the cell easily. Lastly, blood transports the digested simple
ingredients to different parts of the body.

(a) Digestion in Mouth: In the buccal cavity the tongue and teeth work together
to move, cut, grind and chew food into smaller pieces inside the mouth. Saliva
from the salivary glands mixes with the food. This helps in the digestion and
swallowing of the food, The saliva contains the salivary enzymes ptyalin or
salivary amylase. The salivary amylase begins to break carbohydrate into
maltose. Proteins and fats have no change in the buceal cavity. The food from
buccal cavity enters the stomach through the oesophagus by peristalsis. The
muscular wall of the alimentary canal contracts and relaxes simultaneously,
causing forward movement of the food. No digestion of food occurs in the
oesophagus.

(b) Digestion in stomach: When the food reaches the stomach, gastric juice is
secreted from the inner wall.This juice contains the following main components

Forma-15, Biology Class-9-10
Hydrochloric acid: Hydrochloric acid destroys the germs coming with the food

substances, converts inactive pepsinogen into active pepsin and creates an acidic
medium to help its proper functioning.
HCL
Inactive Pepsinogen —__—_——-+ Active Pepsin
Pepsin: Pepsin is an enzyme which breaks protein mto a compound named
polypeptide which consists two or more amino acids,

Pepsine
Protein

Polypeptide

Digestion of carbohydrates and fats do not occur in the stomach, because gastric juice
does not contain any particular enzyme for the digestion of carbohydrates and fats.
As soon as the food enters the stomach, the above mentioned juices are released.
The muscles of the stomach contract and relax continuously. The chemical
reactions that occur convert food into a semi liquid. This is chyme: It is more
or less like a soup and enters the small intestine through valves.

(c) Digestion in the small intestine: When the chyme enters the duodenum, two
secretions, panereatic juice from the pancreas and bile from the liver, are

released through the bile duct. Both of these secretions are alkaline in nature.

Pancreatic juice neutralizes the acidity of the
chyme. The enzymes of the pancreatic juice villi
continue the digestion process of proteins and
carbohydrate (maltose) and start fat

digestion. Bile neutralizes the acidity of the Aa
food and creates an alkaline medium. Bile

salt, one of the constituents of bile, emulsifies at

fats, meaning it helps fat droplets to mix with |

water. It then becomes easier for the enzyme \ e ik.

lipase to digest fats. The lipase converts the . afi im Laetial

ie

fat droplets into fatty acid and glycerol.

Figure: 5.11 Absorption of soluble food
and dats in eam

2025
£23

Lipase
Fats PF _, Fatty acid + glycerol

Pancreatic juice contains trypsin, lipase and amylase. On the other hand,
intestinal juice contains the enzymes, maltase, lactase, and sucrase. Trypsin,
converts partly digested protein into amino acid and simple peptide.

; Trypsin
Polypeptide rs Amino acid + simple peptide

Amylase converts starch into simple glucose.

amylase

starch glucose

Absorption of digested food: Most of the foods are fully digested in the small
intestine in the presence of enzymes and are converted into simple absorbable
ingredients. The inner surface of the intestine (ileum) is covered with finger-like
projections called villi. which contain capillary networks. Each villus (singular
of villi) also contains a lymphatic vessel in the middle which is called the lacteal.
The lacteal is surrounded by blood capillaries. As villi are folded, they increase
the surface area of the ileum. Here absorption of the food ingredients takes
place.

These blood vessels (capillaries) join together to form a large blood vessel called
the hepatic portal vein which carries blood to the liver. Fat droplets are absorbed
into the lacteal of the villi. First it is carried by lymph, then mixes with the blood
stream. Afier reaching into the cell, bile salt becomes separate from fatty acid.

At the time of flowing blood, a kind of watery substance comes out of the
capillaries. This watery fluid is lymph. Lymph supplies nutrients to the cell and

collects the waste products and returns to the blood stream. After absorption the
rest of the chyme reaches the colon.

(d) Digestion in large intestine: No chemical reaction or digestion takes place in
the large intestine. But the water that remains within undigested products is
absorbed here. There also remains a small portion of protein, lipid, salt and excess
enzymes. Water and salt are reabsorbed from these products and are transferred to
the blood. Then undigested products concentrate here and turn into faeces or stool.
Faeces are stored in the rectum and pass out through the anus.

Assimilation: The process of converting digested food substances into the
constituents of protoplasm is called assimilation. Jt 1s an anabolic process.
Through the action of enzymes secreted from protoplasm, simple nutrients are
converted into complex ingredients, such as: amino acid, glucose, fatty acid and
glvcerol. These ingredients spread all over the body through blood. Digested
food substances are converted into protein, carbohydrates and lipids due to the
action of enzymes secreted from protoplasm. This results im repair of wern out
tissues and helps in growth.

5.9 Diseases caused by Intestinal Disorder

Sometimes physical problem or diseases caused by intestinal disorder. They are:

(a) Dyspepsia: Indigestion is dyspepsia. There are many causes of indigestion
or disturbance in digestion, such as- infection in stomach, depression, disease of
pancreas, thyroid problems, enzyme deficiency, diabetes etc. Pai in the upper
abdomen, abdominal flatulence, feeling a full stomach, burning sensation in the
chest, nausea or vomiting. chest pain, sour belch etc. are the symptoms of
dyspepsia. Digestion problem may also occur because of stomach or intestinal
ulcers. Generally people called it gastric. Actually its correct name is peptic
ulcer.

To prevent dyspepsia, we need to avoid over eating, chew food slowly and
properly, avoid smolang and if necessary, consult a physician to find out the
cause and take medicine. It should be kept in mind that sometimes the symptoms
of heart attack are similar to the symptoms of indigestion and peptic ulcer. That's
why if the man above 40 years suddenly feel disturbance in digestion and do not
get relief by conventional medicine then the patient should be hospitalized
quickly. Because in that case, it may be heart attack not indigestion.

(b) Dysentery : Dysentery is caused by infection of a protozoa named
Entamoeha histolytica or by a bacteria named shigella.

Frequent bowel elimination, abdominal! pain, mucous and blood in the stool, and
inability to digest dairy products are the symptoms of dysentery. If necessary,
one needs to follow treatment of dysentery prescribed by physicians; otherwise
it may turn out to be fatal.

The things we need to do to prevent dysentery are as follows— to drink pure

water, wash fruits and vegetables carefully, wash hands with soap or ash after
passing stool, use sanitary latrines, and wash hands and utensils carefully.

(c) Constipation: It is not a special disease. When stools become hard, or stool
does not pass for two or more days, this condition is called constipation. There are
various causes of constipation, such as: withholding bowel pressure, excessive

ey
3
Py
