Chapter Twelve
Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh

Transport plays a significant role in the economy by transporting passengers
and commodities within the country and outside. The transport system plays an
important role in transporting the raw materials, movement of people from one place
to another, marketing of products and stability of the price of products. Trade is
influenced by the transport system. Trade is an important part of the economy of
the country which keeps balance between agriculture and industry.

Rib | Pag SRR Sp

At the end of this chapier, we will be able to—
® provide description of the roads, the railways, the waterways and the
airways of Bangladesh;
« analyze the importance of roads, railways, waterways and the alrways;

® try to avoid accidents while travelling by roads, railways, and waterways
and make others aware of it;

e explain the domestic and foreign trade of Bangladesh;

® give an account of the miport and export products.

2025
2025

Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 19]

Transport System

Passengers and goods moving from one place to other are known as

transportation, Geographical cause have influenced the development of the transport
sector.

Transport system of Bangladesh

t

Waterways Airways

. .

| River transport | {Ocean shipping |

| Land transportation |

| Railways |

National highways.| | Metre gauge,
Regional highways} | Broad gauge
and Unpaved roads and Duel gauge

Roads

Distribution of agricultural products, marketing and for rapid transport, roads
are very important. It is not possible to go anywhere by railways. So roads are
necessary for easy transport. The following are some geographical causes which
influence the development of roads.

Favourable
Condition

Unifavourable

‘ Condition

Roads

The favourable condition of developing the roads

$ | v

Plain land Structure of the soil Location of the sea and
industry
The plain land is | If structure of soil is | Ports develop near the coastal

required to develop the
toad communication.
For this reason, most of

the roads have been
constructed in Dhaka,
Khulna, Rajshahi.

Chatlogram and Sylhet

Areas.

strong and permanent it
is not damaged by rain,

| Roads built on hard soil
lasts longer.

area. A large number of roads
are developed centering around
the ports and industries. For
this reason, roads developed
in Mongla and Chattogram
and other industrial areas
also. Waterways were given
priority in this region.

192

Geography and Environment

The unfavourable conditions of road development

v

¥

¥

Rugged topography

Slope of the land

Lowland and riverine
areas

It is very expensive
and difficult to built
roads on the hilly and
rugged areas. Due to
this, the roads are few
in the Chattozram Hill
‘Tracts.

It is very difficult and
more expensive to build
toads on the slope. Fuel
cost is high. It is a barrier
to build roads on slopes, In
Bangladesh the density of
roads is less in north-east
of the country. Therefore
there are few roads in the

north-eastern Bangladesh.

More culverts and bridges
have to be bmlt on the
lowlands and riverine areas
which costs more. So. few

In the haor regions of Sylhet
and in the southern part o

roads are built in this sie
|

Bangladesh roads are few. River}

irausport get priority in this
region,

The roads of Bangladesh have been built in an unplanned way on the basis of
settlement pattern. Most of the roads have been built for local area connectivity as
a complimentary to the waterways and railways. Usually unpaved roads are transformed
to paved roads. According to the report of Roads and Highways Department, the
length of different types of roads are given ina table.

Table1l: The length of different types of roads under Roads and Dlighways Department

Year 2014 2018 2019
National highway 3.544 3.813 3.906
(kilometres) ” , mt
Regional highway
(kilometres 3 4.278 4247 4 AS3
Jilla road
(kilometes) 13,639 13,242 13,207
Total 21,481 21,302 21,596

Source : Bangladesh Economic Review, 2019* Till February
Task : Fill up the table taking information from above data.
The name of road Increased Decreased Due to

National highway

Regional highway

Jilla road

2025
Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 193

The unpaved and the regional roads of our country are badly damaged by the rainy
season and food, As aresull, the roads are usually repaired throughout the year.
Besides these, as a riverine country, culvert construction and maintenance cause
a barrier on the road construction.

Internal road transport routes of Bangladesh are based on Dhaka as the centre. The
routes are as follows—

Dhaka «———~ Pabna, Rajshahi, Bogura, Rangpur, Dinajpur and Tetulia via Aricha-
Nagorbari.

Dhaka +———+ Faridpur, Kushtia, Jashore, Khulna. Barishal via Daulatdia.
Dhaka «+» Tangail, Jamalpur, Netrokona, Mymensingh,

Dhaka «———+ Cumilla, Noakhali, Fen, Chattogram, Rangamati, Bandarban,
Khagrachhari, Cox’s Bazar. Teknaf.

Dhaka «-——+ North Bengal via Bangabandhu Bridge.

The roads of Bangladesh have a significant contribution to the economy of
Bangladesh. At present, the Bangabandhu Bridge constructed over the Jamuna

river plays an important role in the development of roads in Bangladesh. The roads
are spread out like a net across the country.

The road has played a great role in the balanced economic growth, agricultural
development and distribution, industrialization, development of trade and
commerce and employment opportunity.

Railways

The railway network of Bangladesh is relatively small but it plays an important
role in transporting heavy goods, industrial and agricultural products and labourers. It
connects the main sea-port, cities, trade and industrial centres (fig. 12.1).

Forma-25 , Geagraphy and Environment, Class 9-10
194

Geography and Environment

[ The railways of Bangladesh }

|

(‘Bangladesh has 659)
kilometres of broad
gauge railways
which exits on the
western side of the
Jamuna river in the
division of Khulna
and Rajshahi.

_

Can railways develop everywhere? The development of railways is influenced

f Bangladesh has 375 |

kilometres of dual

gauge railways
from Jamtoil to
Joydebpur.

A

by some geographical factors.

/Metre gauge ilies \
on the eastern bank of
the Jamuna river in the
division of Dhaka,
Chattogram and Sylhet

which is
kilometres in length.

Mh

1,843

x

os" oo"

=

a a2”
BANGLADESH
RAILWAYS 20

LEGEND

cette: Daviad Temes

—— Capen *
seater Dee Mop
oe Mwere abe

‘INDIA A 2"
hore jp |

* -
o yae

254

en

Fig.12.1 : Railway Network of Bangladesh

2025
2025

Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 195

The favourable condition of railway development

Plain land Location of the sea

The plain land is perfect to construct the | Ports develop in the coastal areas.
railways. It costs little and is easy to |The railways developed to connect the
construct, Most of the areas of Bangladesh ports even though there are problems
ate plain land. The railways developed |° aeGéting jf. In’ Chatic the
everywhere except the hilly areas, forests and a WEBER, on Sen ;

railway has developed only in the plam

wetlands.
land not in the hilly areas.
The unfavourable condition of railway development
Rugged topography Soil and lowland

It is very difficult and more expensive to) The railways do not develop on the
construct the railways on the ruge@ed) soft soil. Besides it is difficult to
topography. So, railways are hardly seen in| develop railways in riverme areas.
the hilly areas of Bangladesh. So, there is no railways in southern
part of Bangladesh.

One metre wide rail line is known as metre) At present two railways ferries are rooning'
gauge and 1.68 metre wide rail line is) from Tistamukhghat to Bhahadurabad ghat
known as broad gauge. and from Sirajganj to Jagannathganj.

The Kamalapur rail station of Dhaka is the largest rail station of Bangladesh,
People can travel from Dhaka to almost all important towns of Bangladesh by
railways. There are 474 rail stations in total (Source ; Bangladesh Statistical Pocket
Book, 2017, Table 8.04).

The raihways have been playing an important role in marketing of agricultural and
industrial products, regular movement of taw materials, passengers and
labourers, employment opportunity along with the balanced economic
development and reconstruction of Bangladesh.

The Government of Bangladesh has taken different projects to achieve the
commercial and economic success of railways. If these projects are
implemented successfully then Bangladesh railways will become a modem
transport system.
196 Geography and Environment

Task : There are no railways in the regions of Khagrachhari, Rangamati, Bandarban,
Barishal, Patuakhali, Madaripur, Shariatpur, Meherpur, Cox’s Bazar and
Lakshmipur. Find out the geographical causes why there are no railways in
those districts submit it to the teacher explaining the causes in a group.

Waterways ; Waterways are divided into two types.

¥

River transport

Waterways

L__» Ocean shipping

River transport

Bangladesh is a land of rivers where waterways are spread like a net. The
geographical structure of Bangladesh is favourable for the waterways. Geographical
features are the causes of easy development of waterways.

The favourable condition of developing the waterways

Lowland Riverine areas

Lowland is easily affected by flood. As a| Usually, roads and railways cannot
result, roads and railways cannot develop. | be constructed easily in the riverine
Due to this reason, the waterways are the only | areas. As a result, the waterways are
transport mode to the Haor areas of Sylhet,| mostly used m the southern areas of
and in the southern part of the country in| COUNTY.

Faridpur, Madaripur, Bhola and Barishal.

Waterways are the cheapest means of transport in Bangladesh. There are 8,900
kilometres of inland navigable waterways with innumerable rivers, canals and
wetlands, Out of this, 5,400 kilometres remain navigable all the year round, And the
test 3,000 kilometres are used only durmg the rainy season, Generally. the river in
the south and in the east are more suitable for inland communication. The overall

condition of inland waterways is given below,

2025
2025

Transport System and ‘Trade of Bangladesh 197

Overall condition Year Earning from inland
waterways (crore taka)
Launch ghat 380 al S20.
2014-15 354.58
Ferry ghat 53 2015-16 506.64
2016-17 603.40
2017-18 477.50

Source : Bangladesh Economic Survey. 2013, (BIWTA, Ministry of Shipping *Provisional)

Task : ‘River transport is cheap. Explain.

River ports : Dhaka, Narayanganj, Munshiganj, Goalondo, Barishal, Khulna, Bhairab
Bazar, Ashuganj, Mohonganj, Chandpur, Thalakhathi, Aricha, Ajmiriganj, Madaripur
are important river ports of Bangladesh (fig, 12.2).

The inland waterways play a significant role in the economy of Bangladesh, by
providing transport for goods, passengers and trade.

Task : Identify the main river ports of Bangladesh in a map and submit it to the teacher.

198 Geography and Environment

8B" 89° 90° 91° 92°
in BANGLADESH
Pl :
-26° °° WATERWAYS 26")
foes, LEGEND
C,
~S<,
, INDIA,
+25° (West Bengal)
)
As"
fe 8
. gt Pa aes
ha * RAJSH
aa
o ti
Leg ra
INO
(West Bengal)
22°
24"
0 32 64 Kilometres
88° 89° go”

Fig. 12.2 : Waterways of Bangladesh

2025
2025

Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 199

Ocean Shipping

A country needs to be situated beside a sea in order to develop its ocean shipping. Not
only the location of the sea, but there are some geographical characteristics which
should be present to establish the sea port. With the establishment of sea port proper

ocean shipping can develop.

The geographical conditions for the development of ocean shipping
Harbours The depth of coast | The wide plains Climate

The ships can be | The coast near the | For the | Ice, fog, mists are
saved from | sea port should be | construction of | barrier to the ocean
storms, cyclone | deep enough so that | jetties and | shipping which are
and tidal waves if} all kinds of modern | dockyard for | absent in the coastal
there are | ship can move easily. | ship repairing | areas of Bangladesh.
harbours. wide plains is | As a result. the ocean

| needed. shipping has increased.

The waterways along with the river transport and ocean shipping play a preal role
in both the internal and international trade and commerce. There are three sea ports in
Bangladesh— Chattogram, Mongla and Payra, About 85 percent of import trade and
80 percent of the export trade are carried out through Chattogram port. From Mongla

port 13 percent of the export trade and § percent of the import trade are carried out.
Importance of waterways and ocean shipping is greater than other modes of
transport in the economy.

Airways

The airways have a major role for rapid passenger movement and perishable commodities.
During war, famine and natural disasters airways play an important role. At present
connectivity with the world without the airways cannot be imagined. The

airways have immense contribution to education, culture and international relations.

The favourable condition for the development of airways

Plain land The place free from smog and
thunderstorm

The sutficient plain land for landing and| Airways need an airport free from
taking off. smog and thunderstorm,

200 Geography and Environment

Dhaka is connected with Chattogram, Cox’s Bazar. Sylhet, Jashore, Rajshahi,
Saidpur and Barishal by air (fig. 12.3). Private airline also operates air service in
domestic routes. Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport is the main airport of

Bangladesh. Besides these, there are two more international airports, named
Chattogram Shah Amanat and Sylhet Osmani International Airport,

os" a” oo" a o2”
A, a ae BANGLADESH
ae NS he AIRWAYS 20"

fs Nes of, LEGEND

Lem ket he go Mecano se ee Ec na i
Eo Se .  Davtrwet Bearenary ae
S|! oe

© Aapor +

25°

0 32 64 Kitornatres \v

aa’ aa" ao” oi" ‘o"

Fig. 12.3: Airways of Bangladesh
Trade
Selling and purchasing of goods to meet the demands of the people and the related

activities are known as trade and commerce. The commodities which we need are
not produced or made in one place. As a result, these commodities have to be

2025
Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 201

distributed and that is trade and commerce.

Trade is as follows :

[ Trade and commerce |
T

[
Tnternal trade [tnterational tate)

| Import trade Export trade |

Internal Trade

The internal trade of our country is the collection of raw material and food crop from
village or hat/primary market and the distribution of manufactured industrial goods
in the districts, district head quarters, secondary markets and hat. The internal trade
is the balance between the demand, supply and consumption of the country. Transport
plays an important role in the internal trade of Bangladesh. It is easier to market
different types of produced goods through the roads, railways and waterways.

Task : Make a list of different types of products that are brought in different shops
from other areas and the products from your area which are sold to other areas.

“Task : Show the link between trade and transport in your locality.
Commodities going from Transport mode Commodities coming to
your area your area
Foreign Trade

At one time the export of raw materials was the characteristics of foreign
trade of Bangladesh. At present around 75 percent of foreign exchange earnings are
coming from the ready-made garments and knitwear and the amount of agricultural
product imports increased whereas the amount of export trade decreased gradually.

In the international trade, we have to increase exports for economic development. In
view of thiswe have to increase production, upgrade the quality of products,

Forma-26, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
202 Geography and Environment

decrease production cost, decrease export tax, improve transport system, and make
advertisement for exportable ifems is necessary. Bangladesh imports from China,
India, Malaysia, South Korea, Japan, Hong Kong and Taiwan. Bangladesh products
are exported to USA, UK, Germany, France, Netherlands, Canada and Italy

We have natural resources but for lack of capital and technological knowledge the
proper utilization of natural resources is not taking place. As a result, imbalance

between export and import is taking place.

Import and Export Products

In Bangladesh labour intensive export production is gradually increasing. USA 1s the
largest destination of our exporting products. As the main importer of Bangladeshi
products, USA was placed at the top most position in the fiscal year of 2016-17. The

second biggest importer is Germany, the third is United Kingdom and the fourth is
France.

The main export goods are :

1. Primary goods: Frozen food, agricultural products, raw jute, tea, other primary
foods.

2. Industrial goods : Ready-made garment, knitwear, chemical products, plastic
products, leather, handicrafts, jute and jute goods, home textile, shoes, ceramic
products and engineering products.

peer | Qe | eae,
2015-2016 34,257.18 43,122.0

2016-2017 34,655.90 47,005.0

2017-2018 36,668.17 58,865.0 |
2018-2019* 27,652.80 40,895.0

Source ; Bangladesh Economic Review 2019* till February.

In the import sector in Bangladesh, China has the top most position. In the fiscal
year of 2018-2019, 29,43 percent of total imports came from China and the next is
India while Singapore is in the third position.

2025
2025

Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 203

The main import goods are :
1. The main primary products : Rice, wheat, oil-seeds, crude petroleum, cotton,

2. The main industrial goods : Edible oil, lertilizer, staple fiber, thread, clinker
and petroleum products,

3. Capital goods
4. Other goods (Goods which produced at EPZ)

Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which district has no railway?
a. Habiganj b. Madaripur
c. Tangail ad. Bhairab Bazar

2. To increase the earnings in export trade we have to —
i. reduce the cost of manufactured products.
ll, increase the taxes on industrial products.

lll. increase the quality of production.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iand i b. iand iii

e, iiand iii d. 1, ii and iit
Read the text below and answer the questions number 3 and 4 :

Mr. Ryan does computer business. He imports computer from Mumbai every year.

3. How does Mr. Ryan import computer?
a, By Road b. By Railway
ce. By Airway d. By Ocean shipping
204 Geography and Environment

4. The advantage of carrying the goods in the said transport modes are —
i. to save time.
li, less transport cost.

iii, the less possibility of damage to the equipments.

Which onc of the following is correct?

a. iand ii b. iand iii
ce. tiand in d. 1, tiand iit
Creative questions

1. In last winter holiday Saihan went to his aunt’s house in Sylhet from Rajshahi, He
found out a pleasant and comfortable journey at a low cost. Few days later
he went to Khagrachhari via Chattogram to see the tunnel of Alutila.

a. What is the cheapest means of transport?

Explain the cause of development of river transport in the southern part of the
country.

c. Inamap, show the route of Saihan to his aunt's house from Rajshahi,

d. Make a comparative analysis on Saihan’s journey from Sylhet to
Chattogram and from Chattogram to Alutila.

Rucol Year sha tise Oe deta an neaig aaa
2015-2016 34,257.18 43,122.0
2016-2017 34,655.90 47.005.0
2017-2018 36,668.17 38,863.0
2018-2019* 27,652.80 40,895.0

a. What is import trade?

b. In export trade what is the most suitable way to export the frozen food
and why?

ce. According to the given table in which year is a least balance between export
and import trade. Explain.

d. By analyzing the given table. explain your views about the future of

2025

economic development.
