Chapter Five
Chemical Bond

We know, all substances consist of molecules and atoms. Each of these matters
has its own atoms. Out of these substances, atoms of one or more elements make
a substance’s molecule. Atoms do not remain scattered in the molecule of
substances. They remain highly organized. The force of attraction that binds two
atoms in a molecule is called chemical bond. This bond may be of various
kinds- ionic bond, covalent bond or metallic bond ete. This chapter will focus
upon compounds made of ionic bonds, covalent bonds or metallic bonds, their
process of bonding and their properties.

20235
2025

Chemical Bond &3

explain the concept of valence electrons

write the symbols of elements, formula of radicals and the
formula of compounds using their valency

explain the stability of inert gases

explain the concept of octet and duet rules

explain chemical bonds and the causes of their formation

explain how and why ions are formed

explain the formation of ionic bonds

explain the formation of covalent bonds

explain properties like melting point, boiling point, solubility,
electric conductivity and crystal formation with ionic and covalent
bonds

explain the concept of metallic bonds

explain the electric conductivity of metals with metallic bonds
identify ionic and covalent compounds among the easily available

objects
Rd Chemistry

5.1 Valence Electrons

The number of total electrons in the outermost principal energy level of an
element is called the valence electrons of that element. For example, the
electronic configuration of Potassium and Oxygen show 01 and 06 electrons at
their outermost energy level.

Potassium

Fig 5.01: Valence Electron of Potassium and Oxygen.

Therefore, K has 01 valence electron while O has 06 valence electrons. The
following table shows the valence electron number of some elements from their

electronic configuration:

Table 5.01: Valence Electrons of Elements.

Electronic Configuration Valence

Elemen Biecton
K Orbit | L Orbit | M Orbit | N Orbit =

N(7) 2 5 5
F(9) 2 7 7
P(15) 2 8 5 5
cl(17) 2 8 7 7
Ca(20) 2 8 8 2 2

Here, Nitrogen has 2 electrons in its K orbit while 5 electrons in L orbit. L orbit
is the outermost energy level of Nitrogen. So, Nitrogen has five valence
electrons,

£023
2025

Chemical Bond 85

[ Student Activity: Find out the number of valence electrons of F, P, Cl |
and Ca.

5.2 Valency

You already know that, atoms of different elements donate, accept or share
electrons of their outermost energy level with atoms of other elements to form
molecules. The capacity of bonding of an atom with another atom of an element
while forming a molecule is called valency.

Usually. the valency of Hydrogen is taken to be 1. Valency of an element is
determined by the number of atoms of H or Cl can bond with one ofits atoms.

An atom of Hydrogen bonds with another atom of Chlorine to form a HCl
molecule. So the valency of chlorine is also 1. Again, an atom of Oxygen bonds
with 2 Hydrogen atoms to produce H,O. So valency of Oxygen is 2. | atom of
Na bonds with | Cl atom to produce NaCl, therefore, the valency of Nais 1.

The number of oxygen atoms that can be bonded with an atom nmltiplied by 2
determines the valency of that atom. Example: a calcium atom (Ca) bonds with
one oxygen atom (Q) to produce calcium oxide (CaO). Therefore, the valency of
calcium is [x2 = 2.

Some elements have more than one valency. This kind of valency is called
variable valency. For example, variable valency of Fe are 2 and 3. The difference
between the highest valency of an element and its active valency is considered
as latent valency. For example, in the compound FeCl, the active valency of Fe
is 2 while its highest valency is 3. Therefore, the latent valency of Fe here is
(3 — 2) = 1. Again. in FeCl, the highest valency of Fe is used, which is 3.
Therefore, in this case, there is no latent valency of Fe.
86 Chemistry
Table 5.02: Valency of Different Elements.
Element Valency| Element) Valency) Element Valency
H 1 Na I Fe 2,3
F L K 1 Cu 1,2
cl 1 C Zz, 4 an Z
Br 1 Mg 2
I 1 Al 3 |
Table 5.03: Valency and Compounds of Various Atoms.
Neral Symbol | Valency Compound Zeshiami iar Symbol) Valency Compound
Atom Atom
Hydrogen H 1 Hcl Silver Ag 1 | Agcl
Lithium Li 1 | Licl Fluorine =| F 1 | NaF
Sodium Na 1 Nac] Chlorine cl ‘A Nacl
Potassium K ] KCl Bromine Br 1 NaBr
Magnesium | Mg 2 | Mgcl, | | Iodine I 1 | Nal
Calcium Ca 2 | Cacl, Boron 3 | BCl
Aluminum Al 3 Alcl, Phosphorus | P 4 PCl,
5 PCI,
Iron Fe 2 | FeCl, | | Copper Cu 1 | cucl
3 | FeCl, 2 |Cucl,
_Zine “n 2 zZncl, Oxygen a) 2 |H;,0
Lead Pb 2 PbCl, Carbon c a co
4 PbCl, 4 CHy
Nitrogen N 3 NH; Sulfur 5 2 H;5
5 N20, 4 503
6 503

2025
2025

Chemical Bond 87

5.3 Radicals and Their Valencies

Sometimes, a bundle of atoms from more than one element combine together,
receive positive or negative charges and act as an ion of an element. They are
called radicals.

Radicals may be of positive or negative charge. The number of charge of the
radicals is their valency. For example, three H atoms and one H* corabine with
one N atom to produce the radical named Ammonium (NH,>) ion. Since its
number of charge is +1, so its valency is also 1, Charge may be positive or
negative but valency is always the number only.

Table 5.04: Radicals and Their Valencies.

Radical Formula Charge Valency
Ammonium NH,* +1 I
Carbonate C07 —2 2
Hydrogen Carbonate HCO, =i 1
‘Sulfate 502 2 2
Hydrogen Sulfate H50,° -1 1
Sulfite 50.7 —2 2
Nitrate NOs” =i 1
‘Nitrite | No, “1 1
Phosphate Po? 3 3
Hydroxide OH- —] 1
Phosphonium | pee [oH 1

5.4 Chemical Formula of Compounds

The symbols and numbers belonging to the atoms that together produce a
molecule of the compound are used to express a compound. For instance, two
hydrogen (H) atoms and an oxygen (OQ) atom combine into a molecule of water
88 Chemistry

(H,O). Here, is the chemical formula of water’s molecule, Therefore, a chemical
formula is the way of expressing the compound molecule through the symbols,
formulas and the numbers of atoms of elements and radicals. The numbers of
atoms and radicals are written in subscript.

The System of Writing Chemical Formula

a. The number of atoms there are in an element’s molecule has to be written in
subscript after its symbol. Since nitrogen molecule has two atoms, its formula is
N,. One molecule of Ozone has 3 oxygen atoms, so its formula is O,. Some
elements, like all metals, do not form any molecule, which are expressed
through their symbols only. That way, iron is written as Fe only. The same
system is applicable to all inert gases too, as in Helium, He.

b. Sometimes, a compound's molecule is made of atoms of two different
elements. If their valency is not divisible by a common number, then, the
symbols of both the elements are written side by side and each is followed by the
valency of the other. For example, valency of aluminum is 3 and oxygen is 2.
These numbers are not divisible by a common number. In the case with any
compound consisting of these two elements, first goes the symbol of aluminum
(Al, followed by the valency of oxygen (2). Then the symbol of oxygen (O)
comes followed by the valency of aluminum (3). An example is AL,O,. In the
same way, valencies of calcium and chlorine are 2 and | respectively. The
formula of calcium chloride is supposed to be Ca,Cl,. Since, 1 doesn’t need
mention, so we write, CaCl. Again, valencies of magnesium and phosphate are
2 and 3 respectively. Therefore, the formula of magnesium phosphate is
Mg, (PO,),. Noteworthy that if a radical is there in a number more than 1, then
the formula of the radical goes inside first bracket along with its number and the
valency of the other element follows outside the bracket. For example,
aromonium phosphate (NH,),PO,, aluminum sulfate Al, (SO,), etc.

2025
Chemical Bond 89

c. If the valencies of the two elements are divisible by a common number, then
the quotient after dividing will be written following the formula stated in rule b.
For example, carbon dioxide is a compound made of carbon and oxygen.
Valencies of carbon and oxygen are 4 and 2 respectively. Since they can be
divided by 2, therefore, we have to write the quotients C,O,. Again, since 1 is not
necessary to mention, we will write, CO,. In the compound ferrous sulfate, the
valency of ferrous is 2 and that of sulfate ion (80,7) is 2. Therefore, after
dividing them both with 2, the formula stands FeSO,. Same way, valency of
boron and nitrogen is 3. Therefore, the formula of boron nitride stands B,N, =
BN, =BN.

5.5 Molecular Formula and Structural Formula

The formula of using symbols and the number of atoms of the kind! kinds of
element(s) that constitute the molecule of an element or compound is called the
molecular formula or chemical formula. We have just learned about it. Again,
the formula of expressing a molecule through the symbols and bonds of atoms,
otherwise known as organization of atoms, is called the structural formula. For
example, three carbon atoms combine with eight hydrogen atoms and produce
propane (C,H,) molecule. This C,H, is the molecular or chemical formula of
propane, Again, the three carbon atoms here bond with each other like a chain
and the rest valencies get completed with hydrogen. Thus, valency of each
carbon becomes 4. The structura! formula of propane is shown below:

HHH

| | |

H-c-C-C-H
| ||
HHH

Again, the molecular formula of water HO 1s written in structural formula:

8)

i
HH

Forma-12, Chemistry Class-9-10
oO) Chemistry

CH,, which the molecular formula of methane is written in structural form;

Each line between carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen above is a bond. These
are covalent bonds, you will learn about this bond in this chapter. The structural
formula tells us how many atoms of which element are there ina compound and
how they bonded with each other as well,

5.6 Octet and Duet Rules

All elements tend to make the electronic configuration of inert gases at their
outermost energy level. All inert gases other than helium have 8 electrons at their
outermost energy level. When constituting a molecule, an element obtains the
electronic configuration of inert gases, holding electrons by means of donating,
accepting or sharing electrons. This is known as the octet rule. The central atom
C of CH, molecule has 8 electrons in its outermost energy level. Four of these
eight electrons are carbon’s own while the rest four comes from hydrogen
(Gigure 5.02),

Due to some limitations of the octet rule,
scientists have presented a new rule, which
is called the “Duet rule”. This new rule is
more moder than the octet rule and it has
better utility too. Very much like the inert
gases having 2 or & electrons at their
outermost energy level, when constituting a
molecule. atoms will have one or more

pairs of electrons at their outermost :
Fig 5.02: octed rule in Methane molecule.
energy level.
This is the duet rule. This means. any molecule’s atom will bear one or more
pairs of electrons at their outermost energy level.

The Be atom at the centre of BeCl, has 2 pairs or 4 electrons at its outermost

energy level. B atom at the centre of BF, has 3 pairs or 6 electrons at its outer

20235
2025

Chemical Bond 9]

most energy level. C atom at the center of CH, has 4 pairs or 8 electrons at its
outermost energy level. Not only that, besides the central atom, other atoms like
Cl will have 4 pairs or electrons at its outermost energy level, Likewise F will
have 4 pairs and H will have 1 pair of electrons at their outermost energy level.

This proves, all atoms are following the duet rule. Noteworthy that, elements
1-20 in the periodic table basically follow the rules of octet and duet.

5.7 Inert Gases and their Stability

You have learned about the inert gases or Group-18 elements from the periodic
table. Electronic configuration of these gases are presented again below for your
convenience:

He(z) — is?

Ne(10) —> 1s*2s72p*

Ar(18) —> 1s72s*2p%3s"3p°

Kr(36) —> 1s*2s"2p°3s?3p*3d!4s*4p*

Xe(54) — 1572s*2p°3s73p°3d"4s*4p°4d"5s*5p"

Rn(86) —» 1s*2s?2p°3s73p°3d"4s74p*4d"4f45s*5p°5d"6s"6p°

Helium has 2 electrons in its outermost energy level. Since it required this
number of electrons to fulfill its outermost energy level, helium’s electronic
configuration is stable. Other inert gases have & electrons (ns? np*) in their
outermost energy level. Any element having 8 electrons in its outermost energy
level has got the highest level of stability. Two electrons in the outermost energy
level forms a duet while $ electrons form an octet. Since these gases fulfill both
the duet and octet condition, they are stable. This stability drives them not to
donate any electron to other elements. They do not receive electrons from other
elements either. Chemically, they lack affinity or become inert. No other
element has this fulfilled electronic configuration at its outermost energy level.
As a result, they are not that stable. They tend to fulfill the duet or octet rules at
their outermost energy level. That is why, they donate, accept or share electrons
with other atoms and create mutual bonds.
92 Chemistry

5.8 Chemical Bonds and the Causes of their Formation

Two hydrogen atoms mutually bond together into hydrogen (H,) molecule.
Similarly. atoms of hydrogen and chlorine bond with each other to constitute
hydrogen chloride (H-Cl) molecule. In hydrogen molecule. a kind of attractive
force is effective among the two H atoms. In hydrogen chloride also, there is an
attractive force working among the H and Cl atoms. Basically, this kind of
attractive force is a chemical bond, meaning the attraction force that forces the
atoms to slay together is called a chemical bond. This raises two questions- why
didn’t the atoms stay separate and why did they bond together to create the
molecule?

We have already learned that all elements tend to form the stable electronic
configuration of inert gases at their outermost energy level. When two atoms of
the same element or different element stay close to each other, they donate,
accept or share electrons in order to assume the electronic configuration of the
nearest inert gas. Thus, they create the chemical bond among themselves.
Therefore, it can be said that the reason of chemical bonds is the tendency of the
atoms to assume stability of electronic configuration at their outermost energy
level.

5.9 Cations and Anions

We know, in a normal situation, the number of positively charged proton in the
nucleus of an atom is complemented by the same number of negatively charged
electrons outside its nucleus. As a result, the atom becomes charge neutral. If one
or mote electron from the outer energy level is removed from such a charge
neutral atom, its neutrality will no longer exist. Then, it will turn into an ion with
positive charge. Such an ion with positive charge is called a cation, Usually, the
elements or metals at the lefi side of periodic table donate one or more electrons
from their outermost energy level to gain the electronic configuration of inert
gases and become cations. For example, lithium atom donates one electron from
its outermost energy level in order to get the configuration like helium and
produces lithium cation (Li*). The figure below shows it,

£023
2025

Chemical Bond

93

Similarly, the Na atom donates an electron from its outermost energy level in

order to get the configuration like neon gas and produces the Sodium cation

(Na*). (Fig: 5.04)

Can you tell why the metals
donate electrons to produce
cations?

We know, in any period of the
periodic table, elements
sradually lose their metallic

Fig 5.03; Formation of cation Lithium (Li*).

property as we progress from left to nght. Simultaneously, the non-metallic

property increases in them in this case. It means the elements on the left side of

a period are metals and on the right side are non-metals. Again the more

rightward we progress in a period; the size of atom also decreases. This is the

reason why the metals are larger than other elements. The outermost energy level

of metals usually contains 1. 2 or 3 electrons, Due to the bigger size of the

metals, the outermost energy level is comparatively far from their nucleus which

implies a weaker attraction force towards the nucleus or a weaker bond. As a

result, their ionization energy is far lower. As a result, if a bit of force is applied,

these metals donate one or more electrons from their outermost energy level and

tuum into cations.

Sodium Sodium ion

Fig 5.04: Formation of sodium cation (Na*).

On the other hand, the
non-metals don’t create
cations. They are there at the
right side of any period. They
usually have 5, 6 or 7
electrons at thei outermost
energy level. Being smaller
than metals m their size, the
outermost energy level of

these elements stay comparatively closer to their nucleus and undergo stronger
attractive force. That means their ionization energy is also higher. It requires a
stronger force to remove one or more electrons from such elements which is not
o4 Chemistry

there in a normal chemical reaction. That is why the non-metals de not create
cations.

So, what kind of change occurs in the outermost energy level of the non-metals?
Since their outermost energy level usually lacks 1, 2 or 3 electrons to become an
octet, they easily accept them from other elements and assume the electronic
configuration of their nearest inert gas. In other words, their electron affinity is
high. This acceptance of electrons from other elements increases the number of
electrons than protons in them and the negative charge in them as well. Thus, in
general, the atoms of non-metals are negatively charged. These negative charge
non-metal atoms are known as anions. For example, the Cl atom accepts one
electron to reach the electronic configuration of argon (Ar) gas and thus
produces chloride a (Cl) ion. (Fig 5.05)

Chlorine atom Chloride ion

Fig 5.05: Formation of chloride anion (CT).

5.10 Ionic Bond or Electrovalent Bond

We have already learned that the metals having lower ionization energy easily
pive away clectrons from their outermost energy level and turn into positive
charge cations. On the other hand, the non-metals having higher ionization
energy easily receive electrons into their outermost energy level and turn into
negative charge anions. An electrostatic force remains effective on these
oppositely charged cation and anion. This electrostatic or Coulomb force keeps
them together. The attractive force by which cations and anions, formed by
exchanging electrons,are held within the atoms of a compound is called the ionic

2025
2025

Chemical Bond 95

bond. For example, Na atom donates one electron from its outermost energy
level and forms the Na* cation with its 4 electrons in the outermost energy level.
On the other hand, Cl atom receives one electron donated by Na in its outermost
energy level and forms Cl anion with its 4 electrons in the outermost energy
level. These two mutually opposite charges are attracted towards each other m a
bond of electrostatic force. This attraction force is the ionic bond. In other words,
in the chemical bondimg between a metal and a non metal. the bond that 1s
enforced when the elements turn into positive and negative charge is called the
ionic bond, The compound that has an ionic bond is called an ionic compound.

Na ——+ Na'+e

Cl +e ————» cI}
Na + ¢l—————_ ‘Nat + Cl = Nacl

(4)

Sodium atom Chlorine atom Sodium chloride

Fig 5.06: Formation of sodium chloride.

In the MgO molecule, Mg donates 2 electrons to get the electronic configuration
of Ne and become Mg” with 8 electrons.

Mg ———— Mg* + 2e

The O atom accepts those 2 electrons to get the electronic configuration of Ne
and become O* with 8 electrons.

Now, Mg” and O* come closer to form an ionic bond.
96 Chemistry

ao

Magnesium atom Oxygen atom Magnesium Oxide

Fig 5.06; Formation of Magnesium oxide.

In the NaH molecule, Na atom donates an electron to get the electronic
configuration of inert gas and becomes Na* with 8 electrons.

The H atom accepts that electron to get the electronic configuration of an inert
gas and become H’ with 2 electrons.

Na ——» Nat+ @
H + e& ———* #

Now, Na* and H come closer to form an ionic bond.

In the CaO molecule, Ca atom donates two electrons to get the electronic
configuration of inert gas and becomes Ca** with 8 electrons.

Ca ———+ Ca” + 2¢
The O atom accepts those electrons to get the electronic configuration of inert
gas and become O with 8 electrons.

O+2e° ———+ 0°
Now, Ca*® and O? come closer to form an ionic bond.

Notably, the metals belonging to Group | and 2 and the non-metals of Group 16
and 17 of the periodic table usually commit themselves to ionic bonding. Each
tule has some exceptions. Here in this case, Al of Group-13 commits itself to
ionic bonding. Other elements do not show this tendency to donate or accept
electrons as they have too many electrons at their outermost energy level. As
ionic bonding takes place through electrostatic force, it is very strong.

2025
Chemical Bond 97

5.11 Covalent Bond

You have just learned how a metal and a non-metal commit to ionic bonding in
order to form compounds. That cannot be possible in the case of a reaction
where both the elements are non-metals. So, how do they come together? Yes,
two non-metal atoms can combine into a molecule too, like when two chlorine
atoms are kept close, they bond chemically together into a chlorine molecule.
But how is it possible for each of them has 7 electrons at their outermost energy
level?

The electronic configuration of Chlorine is ¢] (17) —> ts? 2s? 2p 35? 3p?

Since it has 7 electrons at its outermost energy level, chlorine will tend to receive
an electron instead of donating. But in the absence of a donor atom, the receiving
will not happen also, Therefore, when two chlorine atoms come closer, 1
electron from the outermost energy level of each comes together as a pair and the
pair of electrons positions itself in between the two nucleuses of the two atoms.
This is known as electron sharing. Thus. both the atoms assume the electronic
configuration of inert gas at their outermost energy level. The result is that the
two nucleuses of chlorine cannot leave each other or remain in a bonding. This
kind of bonding is called covalent bonding. Therefore, it can be said, in a
chemical bonding of two non-metal atoms, the atoms create a pair of electrons
by sharing one each from their outermost energy level. Both of the atoms
continue to share the pair together in a bond which is called a covalent bond. The
compounds that are endowed with covalent bonds are called covalent
compounds. In each covalent bonding, two electrons participate. The covalent
bonding is denoted by a line (-) and the electrons are denoted by dot (.) or cross
(x) marks.

A chlorine molecule has two chlorine atoms and its formula is Cl, Many
non-metals remain as molecules, like hydrogen (H,), oxygen (O,), nitrogen (N,),
sulfur (S,), phosphorus (P,), bromine (Br,), lodine (I,), fluorine (F,,) ete.

Forma-13, Chemistry Class-9-10
o8 Chemistry

Covalent Bond in Hydrogen: The electronic configuration of hydrogen is
H(1) — 1s*. When 2 H atoms come close, both of them share one electron from
their outermost energy level each. That means, they create a pair of electrons
which makes the configuration same as inert gases. This creates a (H-H)

covalent bond.
H-+-H ——* H-H

(+) =X)

Hydrogen atom Hydrogen atom Hydrogen molecule

Fig 5.08: Formation of covalent bond in Hydrogen molecule.

Covalent Bond in O, Molecule:The electronic configuration of oxygen is
O(8) — 1s? 2s? 2p* It lacks two electrons in its outermost energy level than that
of inert gas. When two O atoms come close, both of them share two electrons
from their outermost energy level each. That means, they create two pairs of
electrons which makes the configuration same as inert gases. This creates a
(O=0) covalent bond. Here the number of bond is two.

Q mm & Q
—_s

oxygen atom oxygen atom oxygen molecule

Generally,
O+0 ——» 0=0 oF 0,
Fig 5.09: Formation of covalent bond in Oxygen molecule.

20235
2025

Chemical Bond 99

Covalent bond is also available in compound’s molecule made of more than one
non-metallic element. For example, in water’s molecule, O atoms share one of
their electrons from the outermost energy level with one electron of H atom.
Thus two (O-H) covalent bonds are created and water’s molecule is structured.

®
2

Fig 5.10: Two (0-11) covalent bonds in water molecule.

In the H,O molecule, two pairs or 4 electrons of O atom do not participate in any
bonding. However, if required, they can also create bonds which you will learn

in higher classes.

An O atom is capable of participating in both ionic and covalent bonds. A Na
atom however is never able to participate in covalent bonding: it always
participates in ionic bonding only. An O atom can accept 2 electrons from other
elements in an omic bond and can share 2 electrons with another element in a
covalent bond. Na atom, on the other hand is capable of only donating electrons
to other elements in an ionic bond.

Molecules of elements with covalent bonds (N,, O,, Cl,, Br,, L, etc.) are called
covalent molecules and compounds with covalent bonds (CH,, CO,, HCI, NH,
etc.) are called covalent compound molecules. Many covalent molecules (CO,,
NH,, O,, Cl,) remain in gaseous state at normal temperature and pressure. Some
of them remain in the liquid state (H,O, C,H.OH etc.) in the same situation while
some others (C,,H,, S,, 1,) are found in solid state. When two covalent molecules
come close, a weak atiraction force remains effective among them. This force is
called Vander Wall’s attraction force. The covalent molecules rernain attached
100 Chemistry

with each other due to this attractive force. That’s why, it is easy to alienate them
with a bit of force. Melting and boiling points of these molecules are also low.
Again, Vander Wall’s attraction force is hardly effective on gaseous covalent
molecules. They remain as gaseous single molecules due to this.

5.12 Characteristics of Ionic and Covalent Bonds

(a) Melting Point and Boiling Point

The compound consisting of an ionic bond is called an ionic compound and the
compound consisting of covalent bonds is called a covalent compound. The
melting and boiling points of ionic compounds are higher than those of covalent
compounds. lonic compounds contain positive and negative charges which
remain tightly connected with each other. Many such positive and negative
charges are organized in an ionic compound in a three dimensional way to create
a crystal. This results in a higher inter atomic force among them and that makes
it tough to alienate from each other. Therefore, they require higher amount of
heat energy to melt or to boil. Inter atomic force in covalent compounds is
comparatively weaker as it is constituted because of Vander Wall’s [orce.
Therefore, they can be boiled or melted with a lower amount of heat energy. You
can easily experiment this with ionic compounds like NaCl, CuSO,, NaNO,,
KCl, CaCl, ete. and covalent compounds like glucose, sugar, or even water. All
the experiments will prove that the boiling point and melting point of ionic
compounds are higher than those of covalent compounds

(b) Solubility

Take some water in a beaker or a glass jar. Add some NaCl, an ionic compound
and continue to stir it. Then, do the same thing with washing soda
(Na,CO,.10H,O), Copper Sulfate (CuSO,5H,O) or some other ionic
compounds; you'll find thern all soluble in water. However, you'll not find the
same result with silver chloride. That means apart from a few exceptions, ionic
compounds are soluble in water. Try the same experiment with covalent

ms
=
oy
2025

Chemical Bond 101

compounds like naphthalene, mustard oil, kerosene ete. covalent compounds.
You will find none of them soluble in water. Although there are few exceptions
like sugar, glucose etc, most covalent compounds are not soluble in water.

Why are some covalent compounds soluble in water? The reason lies in the bond
structure of water. Water is a covalent compound itself where two hydrogen
atoms are connected with one oxygen atom by electron sharing. But since
oxygen is more electronegative than hydrogen, the two electrons of the covalent
bond of water move towards oxygen a bit. As a result, oxygen atom becomes a
partially negative charge while hydrogen becomes a partially positive charge,
meaning a partial positive and a partial negative

end is created in water molecule. This kind of 57 on
charged covalent compound is called polar o's
covalent compound. So, water is a polar soluble. O

a m * * *
Remember, the attraction force of an atom when Je x
it tries to attract the electron pair of a covalent if
bonding to itself is called the electronegativity H
of an atom. The figure 5.10 uses 8 (plus delia) 5 + 5°

and 6 (minus delta) to express positive and

negative charges. mais
Fig 5.11: “6 and 6 indicate

When the ionic compound is added to water, the —_ partial positive and partial
polar solvent, water molecule’s cation attracts Negative charge.

the anion of the ionic compound. The same action takes place between the anion
of water molecule and cation of ionic compound’s molecule. When this
attraction force becomes greater than that between the cation and anion of the
ionic compound, then they become alienated from each other and become
surrounded by water molecule. Thus tonic compound is dissolved into water.

NaCl is an ionic compound and being so, it gets dissolved in the polar solvent,
water. Methanol (CH,OH) is a polar compound and so it gets dissolved mm polar
solvent, water. Since methane (CH,) is neither an. ionic compound nor a polar
compound, it does not get dissolved in water.
102 Chemistry

On the other hand, there is no cation and anion in covalent compounds. They
don’t become attracted or distracted by cation and anion of water. As a result,
they do not break down as ions in water or get dissolved.

However, partial polarity is seen im some covalent compounds like ethanol
(C,H,OH). These covalent compounds only get dissolved in water.

(c) Electrical Conductivity

Take some water solution of edible salt (NaCl)
in a beaker and some water solution of sugar im
another. Now put two graphite rods or any other
land of metallic rod into each solution and
finally connect battery and bulb to each of them
accordingly as shown in the figure 5.12. You
will see, the bulb in salt water solution is lit up

while the one with sugar-water solution is not.
That shows the salt water solution is able to Fig 5.12: Electrical conductivity

You may come to decide that ionic compounds in solution with water can
conduct electricity while covalent compounds cannot.

You can also guess the reason very well. Electro-conductivity requires alienated
positive and negative ions. In the salt water solution, Nat and Cl act as positive
and negative ions respectively and conduct electricity. As in water solution,
ionic compounds remain as alienated cations and anions, therefore, all water
solutions with ionic compounds are electro-conductive.

On the other hand, covalent compounds do not conduct electricity in water
solution as they do not carry alienated ions.

2025
2025

Chemical Bond

103

In CaCl, solution, there is Ca** and Cl. HCI solution contains H' and Cr.
Therefore they can conduct electricity. Glucose (C,H,,0,) does not carry any
ion, so it does not conduct electricity.

Fig 5.13: Crystals of salt
and sugar.

5.13 Metallic Bond

fr

stal form.
.. cry

Formation of Crystals q

Each group will take two beakers. One beaker
will have salt and another, sugar. Add water
to both and heat them a bil to dissolve as
much salt (NaCl) and sugar (C,,H,,O,,) as
possible. Now preserve both beakers for
some days along with a cotton liner hanging
inside each. After some days, pick up the
liners- you will find salt and sugar crystals
have formed around them. Usually, all tonic
compounds remain as crystals. On the other
hand, thouzh some form crystals, usually,
covalent compounds are not available in

Fa

We have seen that, a metal and a non metal element creates an ionic bond among
themselves while two non-metal elements create a covalent bond among
themselves. But when two metallic elements come closer together, there is
created a metallic bond. It means, the attraction force that keeps the atoms in a
piece of metal interconnected is called the metallic bond. You have obviously
seen copper wire, knife, scissors, window grill or gold ornaments etc. Numerous
104 Chemistry

atoms of the same element are interconnected by means of metallic bonds
inside.

The outermost energy level of each metallic atom usually contains 1, 2 or 3
electrons in its electronic configuration. Since their size is bigger than the
non-metallic elements of the same period, the attractive force of the nucleus on
them is less strong. As a result, atoms donate one or more electrons from their
outermost energy level and turn into a positive ion. This positive ion is called the
atomic core. These atomic cores are three dimensionally organized in a metal’s
lattice.

Delocalised electron Atomic core

@0@o®@
OO @O-@
@ @ @:6 @

Fig 5.14: Metallic bonds.

In the metal lattice, the donated electrons come out of the orbit and move freely

at the center of the atomic core. Such electrons are called Delocalized Electrons.
They become electrons of all the metallic ions of that piece of metal instead of
remaining under a particular atom. It can be said that the ions remain organized
like a lattice in the sea of electrons. When a delocalized electron is situated
amidst two metallic ions, both the tons are attracted towards the electron with an
electrostatic force. This causes the two lons to remain connected, which ts the
basic feature of a metallic bond. These delocalized electrons are responsible for
the conductivity of heat and electricity. Similarly, they are the reasons for the
flexibility, brightness, and charge-resistance ctc. features of a metal.

2025
Chemical Bond 105

Electro Conductivity of Metals

All metals are electrical conductors. The delocalized electrons in the metal
lattice are the carrier of electricity in them. If we connect the two ends of a piece
of metal to positive (+) and negative (-) edges of a battery, the electrons will rush
from the negative edge to the positive edge. That means, there will be flow of
electricity from positive end to negative end. Flow of delocalized electrons

creats electricity. There would not have been any electricity flow m the absence
of delocalized electrons.

hoe,
oS
_ | Op +
oP a>
QO) &
Fig 5.15: Mechanism of electrical conductivity of Metal.
Heat Conductivity of Metals

When you heat an end of a piece of metal. you'll find that the other end is also
getting warm fast. It means, metals are heat conductors too, The reason is again
delocalized electrons. When heat is applied, these electrons receive energy and
increase their velocity. They rush from the heated end towards the comparatively
cooler end, Thus heat is conducted in a metal.

Forma-l4, Chemistry Class-9-10
106 Chemistry

~

( Identifying ionic and covalent compounds among locally ayailable

products.

Put edible salt, kerpoor, naphthalene, washing soda ete. in different

beakers containing water. Stir them with a glass tube and mix them

properly. Those which got dissolved in water are ionic compounds and

those which did not are covalent compounds. You can divide all
\_ contpounds into two categories by the same process A

(?) Exercise

1, What is the name of the attraction force which keeps the atoms bonded in a
molecule?

a. Electron affinity b. Electronegativity

c. chemical bond d. Van Der Waals force
2. The formation of which molecule below attains the electronic configuration

of neon?
a. KF b. CaS
c. MgO d. NaCl

20235
2025

Chemical Bond 107

Answer the questions 3 and 4 on the basis of the following electronic
configurations:

3. Which valency is impossible for the element marked by D?
a. 2 b.3
c.4 d.6

4. The element B—
1. forms two types of bonds
ii. donates electron to A
iii. Dissolves in water combining with A
Which of the following is correct?
a. til b. ii and iii
c.ianditi d.i, ii andi
5. Which of the following denotes the formula of aluminum sulfate?
a. Al,(SO4), b. Alsay
c. Al(SO,), d. Also,
6. What kind of compound is calcium oxide?
a, covalent b. ionic

¢. metallic d. polar
108 Chemistry

7. Which of the following compounds is not electro conductive in water
solution?

a. Nacl b. Cacl,

c. Hel d. C,H,,0, (Glucose)

x Y

(Here X and Y are symbolic. Not symbols of any element)

a. What is a covalent bond?

b. Why is there a difference in the size between Na and Nat ions?

c. What kind of bond is there in the compound YX of the stem? Explain.
d. Though X is capable of forming both covalent and ionic bonds, element
Y never goes into covalent bonds — Explain with logic.

2. Read the following stem and answer the questions
(a) CHy (b) Nac] (ce) ccl, (d) CH,OH

a. What is a covalent bond?
b. Why is water a polar compound? Explain.
c. Which compound of the stem forms a crystal? Explain

d.The compound (b) of the stem is soluble in water but compound (c) is
not. Analyze

ba
Lia |
=
a
