Chapter 8
The Economy of Bangladesh

Ratan is a rich farmer. For a few years he has been using the modem technology
in farming which has increased the production. After spending the money in
household expenditures he saves the excess money. Last year he established a
small readymade garments factory which is conducted by his wife Jayanti. Lots
of female workers of his village work there. They have enrolled their only son
Roni in a good quality school. Roni is given treatment at the health complex of
the union according to the doctor's prescription when he becomes sick.

From the above discussion we get an overview of a certain sectors of
Bangladesh economy, such as agriculture, industry and service.

7 AS im sec

After studying this chapter, ¥ we will be able to-
¢ explain the main characteristics of Bangladeshi economy;
* explain the main sectors (agriculture, industry and service) of Bangladeshi
economy;

» analyze the comparative importance of the main sectors (agriculture,
industry and service) of Bangladeshi economy;

* identify the dependence of agriculture and manufacturing sectors on one
another;

* discuss sectorwise analysis of the data of the economy and use it
mathematically and

* discuss the importance of various sectors through drawing graphs.

2025
2025

The Economy of Bangladesh 115

8.1 Characteristics of Bangladesh Economy

Bangladesh was suppressed and oppressed by the 200-year British reign and 24
years of Pakistani rule. As a result, the development of Bangladesh economy did
not take place to a great extent. Moreover, the economic infrastructure was
damaged due to the long war of nine months in 1971. After the four decades of
independence there has been significant development in the economy of
Bangladesh. But it is still a developing country with lower-middle per capita
income.

The main characteristics of Bangladeshi economy is given below:
1. Agriculture

Agriculture is an important sector of
Bangladesh economy. But the production
capacity in agriculture of our country is
very low, compared with that of the developed
countries due to the primitive methods, lack
of good quality seeds, irrigation and
agricultural loans, and for natural
calamities. But the situation is improving
day by day. Now there is more availability
of good quality seeds, fertilizers, pesticides
and irrigation. Thus the production is also
increasing. In 2019-2020 the GDP of total agriculture sector (crops, livestock,
forestry and fisheries) was about 13.35%, But 40.60% of the total labor force

(Age 15+) is involved in agriculture (MES, 2016, BBS).

tre

2. Industry

The development process in industrialization
in Bangladesh is very slow. So, it is
necessary to adopt a new policy for
industrialization to increase the rate of
development. National policy was declared
for this purpose in the year 2010. The aim of
this policy is to increase the employment,
participation of women in industrialization
and reduce poverty. To achieve these goals
the government has taken some steps, like to

Labours working in factory
116 Economics

reduce batriers on investment, to create tax [ree investment, to encourage private
investment, to ensure free flow of capital, to increase foreign investment, to
create markets abroad, and establish labour intensive industries. The benefits
from these projects can be seen now. In the fiscal year 2018-19, the share of
industry sector was 35.14%. But 20.40% of the total labour force is involved in
this sector (LFS, 2016, BBS).

3. Increasing in Per Capita Income

The per capita income in Bangladesh is low, compared to that of the developed
countries as the production of agriculture and industry is lower in this country,
population is high and opportunities of employment are low. According to
Bangladesh Economic Review-2019, the per capita income was 1,75] US
dollars (2017-18). According to Bangladesh Economic Review-2020, the per
capita income is 2,064 US dollars. Therefore, our per capita annual income is
increasing although it is happening slowly.

4. Increasing in Standard of Living

In 2020, in our country 20.5% people live below the poverty line, in year
2018-2019 average life expectancy is 72.6 years, 98.1% people have the access
to pure drinking water and literacy rate of the people is 74.4% (in 2019).

5. Increasing in Supply of Capital for Investment

Our saving are low due to low per capita income. Thus the investment or
accumulation of capital is also low. Currently the government has adopted many
encouraging policies to attract investors. For this reason domestic and foreign
investment is increasing slowly. In the fiscal year 2019-20 the total investment
was 31.75% of the GDP. Increase in investment increases the production of our
agriculture and industry sectors. It helps to reduce poverty in our country.

6. Food Deficiency and Malnutrition

The Government of Bangladesh has given highest importance to agriculture
sector in order to make Bangladesh self-sufficient in difterent food production.
For this reason, the use of good quality seeds, fertilizers and technology has
increased in the production over the past few years.

2023
2025

The Economy of Bangladesh 7

7. Decrease in Population Growth Rate

Bangladesh is an over-populated country. The total population of this country is
16 crore 57 lakh 72 thousand 364 (according to the estimate of the year 2011).
According to the preliminary calculations in 2019 the population growth is 16
crore 65 lakh and the population growth rate is 1.37% which was 1.48% m 2001.
Though population is decreasing by degrees, it is a very small country in area
and thus it is the world’s 9 most populated country. According to
Bangladesh Economic Review-2020, our present density of population is 1,125
persons living in per square kilometer (calculate in 2019).

8. Unemployment

In our country savings are low compared
with population. Thus the accumulation of
capital is low. Unemployment is increasing
as there is scarcity of capital which reduces
employment opportunity in agriculture and
industry sectors-

But domestic and foreign investment is increasing in Export Processing Zone
(EPZ). To attract the foreign investment, various encouraging policies have been
adopted which are increasing foreign investment and the economy is in progress.
Thus we can hope that the unemployment problem will be reduced in near
future. (25 lakh people of our total population were unemployed in 2014-15).

9. Increase in the Use of Natural and Human Resources

Natural resources are the basic elements in socio-economic development and in
raising the standard of living. Currently, discovery and the use of these natural
resources have increased. The combined contribution (approximate) of natural
gases, unrefined petroleum and coal and other mineral resources in GDP was

1.72% in the fiscal year 2019-2020, 71% use of the fuel comes from natural gases.
118 Economics

Till now a total of 28 gas fields have
been discovered. Gas is mostly used in
the production of electricity. To ensure
the fuel security the refining capacity of
Eastern Refinery is being increased and
SPM (Single Point Mooring) project has
started to deport refined and unrefined
fuel oil in the deep sea. The total storage
Coal Mine of our 5 coal mines
(Khalashpir of Rangpur, Barapukuria of
Dinajpur, Fulbaria and Dighipara and
Jamalganj of Bogura) is almost 3300 million tons. 65% of the extracted coal is
used in Barapukuria power station to produce electricity.

Coal Mine

Various public and private projects are in progress for the development of
human resources. Among these, family planning, women and children, social
welfare, youth and sports development, culture, labor and employment, etc. are
important.

10. Deficit in Foreign Trade

To meet the various needs and development of our mass population we have to
spend lots of money to Import various products which is much higher than our
export earnings. For this reason, there is an imbalance in the trade. Currently our
export has increased, thus the trade deficit is decreasing. Besides, there has been
a surplus after removing deficit because of the foreign remittance.

11. Decreasing Dependence on Foreign Aid

It is not possible to collect all the money we require for the economic
development from within the country, So, we have to depend on foreign aids.
But the good thing is, the dependency on foreign aid is decreasing. Because of
inadequacy, uncertainty and lengthy process of these aids, our development
process is hampered. So, the dependence on internal sources is increasing which
can be identified as a positive move forward.

2025
2025

The Economy of Bangladesh 119

12. Development of Economic and Social Infrastructure

To increase the production, components of production and proper distribution of
products in the market and to maintain the stability at price level, the economic
infrastructure such as roads, railways and naval system, electricity and
telecommunication system plays a vital role, The government has taken various
steps to improve the country’s infrastructure. Constructing Padma Bridge, 26
kilometer long elevated expressway to reduce traffic jam, safe naval system,
development of electricity sector and
setting up modern telecommunication
system through the establishment of
second submarine cable are some
important projects under taken by the
government. Education, training, research,
public health, cultural development,
ethical views play an important role in the
development of human resources. Current
government has announced education |
policy 2010 to improve the quality of Padma Bridge

education. Also to develop public health, a unified program of health, population
and nutrition had been under taken.

13. Privatization Programmes

Though ours is a mixed economy, the government has given importance to
privatization to maintain a free market economy for the development of our
economy in all respects. For this purpose the government has taken various

steps. After the establishment of Privatization Board (now Privatization
Commission) in 1993, a total of 77 institutions have been privatized till Inne
2012. Among these 56 institutions were privatized by direct selling and 21
institutions by selling shares. According to expert opinion, the impact of this
activities are mixed.

14. Planning

It is necessary to co-ordinate between public and private programmes for our
economic development. In this regard, implementable development plan is to
ptepare for proper distribution and use of resources. For this, the
government of Bangladesh has prepared a planning document titled
“Bangladesh perspective planning Vision (2010-2021). In the light of vision
2021 keeping ahead the celebration of Golden Jubilee of our independence. Its

main objective is to achieve higher growth rate, alleviating poverty, being a
middle income country and remove all discrepancies including regional ones.
120 Economics

From the above characteristics, we can say that the economic condition of
Bangladesh has developed to a large extent m comparison tothe past. Various
dynamic programmes are being taken and implemented for economic development.
Technically skilled labor and group of entrepreneur are being created through
the expansion of education and technology. They are playing role in production
increase of the country and to remove social superstition through self-employment.
As a result, the possibility of the development of Bangladesh is being
hampered in some sectors for the lack of good governance and inequality of
increasing income and resources,

Task: What steps should be taken, on the basis of current context, for the
economic development of Bangladesh?

8.2 Main Sectors of Bangladesh Economy

The branches or sections of an economy of a country carry out economic
activities within its own region, and on the basis of their combined contributions
an economy is formed. These branches or sections of an economy are called the

economic sectors.
Main Three Sectors of Bangladesh Economy

’ ' ’

Agriculture Sector Industry Sertor Service Sector

Agriculture Sector

Agriculture is the work that involves cultivation, sowing seeds, nurturing of
grams-trees, collectng crops and then storing, protecting and marketing these
crops. Apart from growing crops agriculture sector also meludes fisheries, bee
breeding, raising livestock and forestry.

——

Pisciculture Livestock Sundorbans

2025
The Economy of Bangladesh 121

The introduction of sub-sectors of agriculture sector is given below:
A. Food Grains and Vegetables

Farmers of our country produce rice, wheat, jute, pulses, sugarcane, tobacco,
tea, oilseeds, etc. among food grains, and potatoes, bean, gourd, peas, potol.
bitter gourd, eggplants, etc. among vegetables.

B. Animal Resources

In our country poultry, cows, goats, lambs, buffalos, horses, pigeons and other
birds are raised for both domestic and business purposes. Meat, milk, eggs,
feathers and skins etc. of these animals are included in this sector.

C. Forest Resources

Only 17% of our country's land is covered with forests, whereas 25% of a
country should be covered with forests. In these forests bamboo, cane, shal,
shegun, shundori, goran, geowa, gamari, korai, kuchi and keora. trees can be
found. We get wood, rubber, glue, shan, oil, candles and honey from these trees.

TD. Fish Resources

Various types of fishes and fish products are obtained from the pond, river, haor
and ocean. These are divided into two groups, for example: fresh water fish and
sea fish. Fresh water fishes are: Ruhi, Chital, Koi, Shing, Magur, etc. and sea
fishes are: Rupchanda, Vetki, Loitya, etc. The fishery sector being huge
developed recently. The government has given this sector a seperate dignity.
Contribution or importance of agriculture sector:

The economic growth of Bangladesh economy is dependent on agriculture
sector to a great extent. The development of rural economy. food security that 1s
self-sufficiency in food, poverty reduction, raising the standard of living, and
increase in employment-— all are directly related to the development of
agriculture, Thus the government is trying everything for the development of the
agriculture sector. For this purpose, the steps are taken for the development and
expansion of technologies, ensuring that every single person gets required raw
materials for agricultural products, easy loans, agro-insurance and subsidy in
agriculture, etc. A total of 63% of our population is directly or indirectly

Forma-16, Economics Class 9-10
122 Economics

dependent on agriculture. A total of 454.04 lakh metric tons of food grains was
produced in the year 2019-2020. A total of 40.60% of the labor force is employed in
agriculture. Shan, golpata, straw, bamboo, cane, and wood from agriculture are
used as fuel supply, furniture and employment. On the other hand, protein
requirement of the people, raw materials for industries and creating the market
for industrial products, ete. are playing a vital role in the economic
development.

The contribution of agriculture sector/sub-sectors in GDP are shown below:

Sector/Sub-sector 2018-2019 2019-2020
1, Agriculture and Forestry 10.11 9.93
a. Food Grains and Vegetables 7.05 6.85
b. Live stock 147 L.5
c. Forestry 1,58 1.33
2. Fish Resources 3,30 3.09

Thus, in the fiscal years 2018-19 the contribution of agriculture sector 14.02%.
But in the fiscal years 2019-2020 the contribution was 13.61%. Main export
products of the agriculture sector are frozen foods, raw jute, jute-products and
tea.

Task: The importance of agriculture sector is very significant for the

economic development of Bangladesh. Explain.

Industry Sector

The conversion of natural resources or raw materials or primary materials into
secondary or final goods through certain processes in the factory is called
industry.

2025
2025

The Economy of Bangladesh 123

In calculating the national income of Bangladesh, industry sector includes
minerals and mining, manufacturing, electricity, gas and water supply. and con-
struction among the 15 sectors.

alls

Metro Railway Ship Indusiry

Gas Field

A short introduction to industry sector is given below:

1. Minerals and mining

The sub-sectors of this sectors are:
a) Natural gases and unrefined oil

b) Other minerals and mining (Coal, Limestone, Chinaclay, Sulfur, Chalk,
Silica, Bronze etc.)

2. Industry (manufacturing)

a) Large and Medium Industries: Large and medium industries are separately
mentioned below:

Garments industry, sugar industry, fertilizer industry, cement industry, ship
industry, jute industry, paper industry, etc. are included in large industries.

Leather industry. readymade garments industry. cigarette industry, plastic
industry and hosiery industry are the renowned medium industries of
Bangladesh.

b) Small Industry: Small industry is divided into 2 groups as below:
Industries that produce small parts of equipment such as match industry, wooden
industry, soap industry, cosmetics industry, vehicle servicing and repairing
industry, etc. are included in small industry.
124 Economics

Silk, bamboo, cane, pital (brass) and kasa (white brass), weaving industry and
mrit shilpo are renowned cottage industries.

ai Electricity, Gas and Water: The subsectors of this sectors are three and
they are: (a) Electricity, (b) Gas and (c) Water

4, Construction Industry: Construction of bridges, roads, personal and
business, all types of housing are included here.

Industry sector is the combination of all four sectors mentioned above.

The contribution of industry sector to the GDP was 35.14% in the fiscal year
2018-2019. In the fiscal year 2019-2020 the contribution of the total industrial
sector was 35.36%.

Overall growth rate GDP of industry sector is listed below:

Sector/Sub-sector 2018-2019 2019-2020
1. Mineral resources L.82 1.77
2. Industry (manufacturing) 19.89 19.67
| 3. Electricity, gas and water resources 1.33 1.29
4. Construction 8.12 8.40

Bangladesh has established Export Processing
Zone (EPZ) for socio-economic development,
poverty reduction, and quick expansion of
industry sector. It has attracted many domestic
and foreign investors who have helped the
expansion of industry sector.

Till December 2019 a total of 470 (proposed
572) industrial organisations are involved in
production in § EPZs [Chattogram, Dhaka, Monela,
Cumilla, Ishwardi, Uttara (Nilfamary), Adamji
and Karnafuli]. A total of 5,14,262 people are
employed here. It has exported products worth 4884.01 US dollar.

2023
2025

The Economy of Bangladesh 125

The government has announced industrial policy 2016 to speed up the progress
in industrial sector, The main purpose of this policy is to create employment.
involve women in the main stream of industrialization, reduce poverty and to
expand small and cottage industries. According to vision 2021, the industry
sector will emerge as a strong sector within year 2021 where its contribution to
the total GDP will be 40% and contribution to the industrial employment will be
25%,

In agriculture, industry, transport, household, service sectors, demands for
electricity, gas, oil and other natural resources are increasing day by day. For this
reason the government has taken various long-term plans in this sector. The
government has taken steps to include extra 14,773 megawatt electricity to the
national grid by the year 2010-16. The government is determined to ensure
electricity for everyone in the country within 2021. In the total use of our fuel,
75% comes from the natural gases. Gas is mostly used in the production of
electricity. Gas is used as the raw material for the production of chemical
fertilizers; and factories, transport and households use it as fuel.

Limestone is used in the production of cement, glass, soap, bleaching powder
etc; chinaclay is used in the production of crockery and sanitary products;
silica in colors and chemical products; sulfur in gunpowder, matches and
refining oil. It is due to increase in investment for infrastructural development,
growth rate has increased in construction sector.

From the above discussion, it can be said that with development of overall
industry sector, it is possible to increase national income, and per capita income,
to improve standard of living, to reduce trade deficit and dependency on others.

Task: The development of our country is possible through the overall

development of the industry sector. Explain.

126 Economics

Service Sector

The non-material services that are produced through economic activities Le.
those activities that are not visible as converted raw materials but they satisfy
human demand having an exchange value are called Sevice. Service sector
provides a service, which is not an actual product and could not be held in our
hand but it can satisfy our needs and it also has an exchange value.

POUT Ee ~ is
itt hat WiLL iE :

Financial Institution ‘Transport systena

In Bangladesh, wholesale and retail trades, hotels and restaurants, transport,
communication, banks, insurance and other financial institutions, housing,
public administration and defense, education, health and social service,
community, social and personal services— all are included in service sector.
These services are provided to general people in exchange for money and people
buy these to meet their needs. As in other countries, service sector is the single
largest sector in our economy. In the fiscal year 2018-19 the contribution of
service sector is 51.26%. In 2017-18 it was 52.11%.

2025
2025

The Economy of Bangladesh 127

The contribution rate of the sub-sectors that are included in the overall service
sector to the GDP is given below:

Sector 2018-2019 | 2019-2020
1. Wholesale and retail trade 13.34 13.39
2. Hotel and restaurant 1.04 L.o7
3. Transport, storage and communication 9,34 9.32
4, Financial intermediation 3.89 3.79
5. Real estate, renting and other business activities TART 7.96
6. Public administration and defense 4.09 4.19
7. Education 3.02 3.07
8. Health and social work 2,15 2,20
9. Community, social and personal services 10,78 10.78

From the above list it can be seen that wholesale and retail trade has the highest
contribution and the second highest is transport, storage and communication
sector and sub-sectors of this sector are given below:

a) Land Transport

It includes roads and railway system. According to the estimate of 2019 upto
February the road includes national highway of 21,569 kilometer. The length of
railway is 2955.53 kilometer.

b) Water Transport

Our main sea port is Chittagong. 97% of our export-import is conducted through
this port and our second sea port is Mongla. Our internal naval transport
corporation gives services to people through 188 water vehicles that include
ferry service, passenger service, cargo service and ship repairing service. etc.

c) Air Transport

The authority of private airways is covering 3 international and 7 internal
airports. There are also 2 STOL (Short Take Off and Landing) posts in use.
128 Economics

d) Post and Telecommunication

Bangladesh Telecommunication Company Limited (BTCL) is carrying out
various projects for modernization, development and expansion of our
telecommunication system, The number of customers has increased after the
establishment of Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission
(BTRC) since 2002. Number of customers has exceeded 12.8 crore in January
2017.

Postal department is at service through 9,886 post offices over the country. From
this sub-sector the growth rate has been 6.98% for the fiscal year 2016-17.

Task: What steps do you think should be taken for the development of service
sector in Bangladesh?

8.3 Relative Importance of Various Sectors

Our economy has 15 sectors in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) on the basis
of production. These sectors are divided into 3 bigger sectors such as agriculture,
industry and service sectors. In the context of Bangladesh agriculture is the main
component of growth and economic development as our economic infrastructure
evolves around agriculture. Ensuring food security, poverty reduction,
unproving the standard of living, increase in employment of this huge
population— all are directly related to the progress of agriculture. But depen-
dency on agriculture is not a sign of stable economy, because there is always an
uncertainty in the production every year due to flood, cyclone, tsunami, drought,
many other natural calamities. Therefore, it is required to establish industry
based economy facing the challenges of free market and globalization. Because
modernization of agriculture. efficient use of natural resources, less dependency
on foreign countries, earning more foreign currencies and developing a strong
defense system— all are possible through industrialization. Along with the
development of agriculture and industry through the various projects of overall
service sectors, for example, generating educated and trained human resources,
developing women and children, youth development, sports development,
infrastructure development, the development of — information

20125
The Economy of Bangladesh 129

technology, achievement of vision 2021 is possible which will help build an
economically stronger Sonar Bangla.

To fulfill this purpose and to achieve sustainable growth in agriculture, the
government has taken various steps such as granting more subsidies, ensuring
the supply of continuous electricity for irrigation, increasing the flow of loans,
inventing new seeds that can cope with unfavorable weather and saline water
and promoting industry-based agriculture. Production in industry has increased
due to the increase in investment in electricity and other infrastructural sectors.
Almost all the sectors under overall service sector maintain some growth rate,
taking the growth rate of this sector to a satisfactory level.

The growth rate of GDP (%) is shown below through the bar diagram:

Figure: Broad Sectoral GDP Growth at Constant Prices

a 12.06 T2067

2016-17 2017-18 ; 218-19 2019-208

*Provisional

The periodical growth of the years from 2016-2017 to 2019-2020 has been
presented in the above bar chart. In the bar chart it has been shown that the
growth rate of GDP was 7.28% in 2016-17. The growth rate of GDP was 7.86%
in the fiscal year 2017-18. 8.15% was in 2018-19 and in 2019-2020 the

increasing rate of GDP was 5.24%. Though it is slow, but the growth rate of our
GDP is increasing.

Forma-17, Economics Class 9-10
130 Economics

The relative picture of the growth rate and the three years- 2017-18 and 2019-20
has been presented below:

The sector wise contribution rate to the GDP on the basis of of the fiscal year
2005-06 in percentage:

Overall Sectors | ——- 2018-19 2019-20
Agriculture 13,60 13.95
Industry 35.14 | 35.36
Service 51.26 $1.30
Total 100 | LOO

It is realised from the chart that in 2019-2020, the service sector has mainly
contributed to our GDP which was 51.30%. The second one was industrial sector
and its contribution was 35.36%. The contribution of agriculture sector is
diminishing and this sector provided the least contribution which is 13.35%.

Task: Explain the contribution of agriculture, industry and service sector on
the basis of data that are easy to find locally.

8.4 Dependency of Agriculture and Industry Sectors on Each Other

Ramiz is a rich farmer. He produces more rice in his land by using seeds that
give high return, irrigation through deep tube wells and using required organic
fertilizers. He supplies the rice to the market, which he keeps in the sacks made
of jute. Many people buy these to satisfy their food requirement.

From the above, we can say that the industry sector supphes the equipment and
fertilizers for the development and modernisation of agriculture. Similarly, raw
materials come from agriculture sector for the expansion of industry.

2025
2025

The Economy of Bangladesh 131

Agriculture Based Industry (Sugar Industry) Industry Based Agriculture

Dependency of agriculture and industry sectors on one another is discussed
below:

Most of our industries are agriculture-based. The main industries of our country
are jute, tea, leather, sugar and paper industries and all of these are dependent on
agriculture for the supply of raw materials. For this reason, region-based
industries have been developed, for example, jute industry in Dhaka and
Narayanganj; tea industry in Chattogram and Sylhet; sugar industry in North
Bengal. With the expansion of these industries, the production in agriculture will
increase due to the increased demand of raw materials and farmers will get
proper price for their products. This will increase the income and the standard of
living of the farmers. Savings and accumulation of capital will increase as the
income of the people will increase and thus more investment will be possible in
the industrial sector,

In our country the base of small industries is agriculture. Bamboo and cane
produced in agriculture are used as raw materials for the cottage industries. On
the other hand, the equipment for cultivation in agriculture, fertilizers,
pesticides, medicines, etc are produced in industries. Thus agriculture plays an
important role in marketing the industrial products. As the purchasing capacity
ofthe farmers increases, the demand for other industrial products also increases,
which helps the expansion of industrial sector. It is possible to achieve
self-sufficieny in producing food grains through the modernisation agriculture.
The cost of import will be saved and the saved money can be used for the
development of industry.
132 Economics

From the above discussion, it can be said that our agriculture and industry
sectors are dependent on one another, and they complement each other. Thus the
development in both sectors together is necessary for the economic
development, self-sufficiency in food and self-reliance of our country.

Task: Identify the areas where agriculture and industry are dependent on each
other.

{ The Source of all information of this chapter: Bangladesh Economic Review 2020]

Exercise

Short Questions

1. What are the characteristics of Bangladeshi economy?
2. What are the sub-sectors of agriculture?

3. Make a list of sub-sectors of agricultures based on examples.

Descriptive Questions
|. Explain the characteristics of Bangladeshi economy.

2. Discuss the relative importance of agriculture, industry and service sectors
of Bangladesh economy.

3. Explain the interdependency of agriculture and industrial sectors.

2023
2025

The Economy of Bangladesh 133

Multiple Choice Questions

1, According to the Economic Review-2020, the per capita annual income of
Bangladesh is-
a. 1909 US dollar b. 2012 US dollar
c. 2064 US dollar d, 2098 US dollar

2. The purpose of Bangladesh government to announce the Industrial Policy 2010 is
to increase
i. Increasing employment.
it. Increase women's participation in industry.
iii, investment by increasing tax.
Which of the following is true?
a. iand ii b. iand iti
c. iiand in d. i, ii and iii
Read the following passage and answer question number 3 and 4.
Moti lives in a remote area with his family. There is no electricity and gas.
Everybody in the family lives on making paper packets.
3. Which sector of industry includes the activity of Moti and his farnily?
a. large b. medium

e. small d. cottage

4. For the development of manufacturers like Moti
a. loans on easy conditions should be given,
b. use of foreign goods should be reduced.
c. training should be provided.

Which of the following is true?

a. i b it
c. ill d, i, it and it
134 Economics

Creative Questions
1. Two sectors of the economy

A. Farmer cutting jute in the field B. jute made bags

a. What is industry?

b. Why is the rate of capital accumulation low in our country?

c. How is economic growth dependent on the development of sector 'A'?
d. Sectors 'A' and 'B' complement each other- explain.

2025
