Chapter Fourteen
Natural Disaster of Bangladesh

Bangladesh is one of the most natural disaster prone countries in the world, The
natural disasters like cyclones, tidal waves, flood and drought damage our
property, human lives, animals and environment every year. Our geographical
location is one cause for these disasters.

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to—

explain the disaster and hazard;
explain the different kinds of natural disasters of Bangladesh;
explain the disaster management cycle;

explain the disaster management of the natural disaster of coastal areas of
Bangladesh;

evaluate the functional and technological use of warning about the Tsunami
and the scale of earthquake;

make people aware about how to confront natural disaster and what are the
measures to mitigate it,

2025
Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 217

Disaster and hazard

The people of disaster-prone countries like us should have clear information about
disaster, hazard management ete. Disaster is such a thing which disturbs the normal
aclivilies greatly and if damages lives. properties and environment. It is a very
difficult task for the affected societies to tackle the loss by their own resources alter
disaster, As a result, the humanitarian aids or relief are needed from the foreign
countries to tackle the post disaster situation. According to Asian Disaster

Preparedness Centre, Bangkok, ‘A hazard means a threat.’ A future source of danger.
Tt has the potential to cause harm to :

1, People— death, injury, disease and stress.
2. Human activity—economic, educational.

3, Property— property damage, economic loss.

4. Environment—loss of fauma and flora, pollution loss of amenities. Some
examples of hazard are earthquake, volcanic eruption, floods,cyclones and landslides.
A hazardous event that causes large number of deaths and property damage is a
natural disaster.

Flood

Flood is one of the natural disasters in Bangladesh. Floods are considered harmful to
people of this country when it damages the crops and lives but it plays a
significant role on the economic condition of this country. In the context of
Bangladesh when an area goes under water and human lives and resources are
damaged it is known as flood.

Bangladesh is a rainy and riverine country. The annual rainfall amounts to 2,300
millimetres. There are 700 rivers along with the 57 international mivers which is
spread out across the country like a net in Bangladesh. There are 54 rivers which
originate from India.

Forma-28, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
218 Geography and Environment

Causes of flood

Physical factor Man-made factor
Heavy rainfall in upstream A large number of trees are cut along the
Geographical location river plains
Influence of Monsoon climate Farakka bridge constructed over the Ganges
Less depth of river Impact of damps constructed on other rivers

Water flow from melted ice of Himalaya | Unplanned urbanization
High and Low tides of Bay of Bengal
Earthquake

Classification of flood

Flood caused by
Monsoon flood ~~ ase high and low tide
I Flood {

Seasonal t Temporay
} Flash flood i
Wid cl
Se Wann | General height from
‘ High speed of increase and Son SMES
Amount of loss decrease oF wat
is high great crease of water |
The slow process of { Tn new moon and full
increase and decrease Usually in hilly area moon flood takes
of water dangerous there

Impact of flood

The havoc of flood is enormous, A huge amount of crops are damaged due to flood.
People die and normal life is hampered. Life of birds and animals js destroyed
and endangered. Resources are damaged. During the flood of 2000, 1.84 lakh hectors

of crops in 16 districts were damaged. Loss of production amounted to 5.28 lakh
metric tons.

Task ; Prepare a bar graph in percentage in the last five years of the flood affected
areas.

2025
2025

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 219

Flood has happened in the sloping low-lying plain land of the largest deltaic

Bangladesh in different centuries. Between 1954 and 2004. in 1974, 1978. 1984, 1988,

1998, 2004, the worst hit floods in the last few decades. Among these the duration

of 1998 flood was the longest and many areas were affected. The record of flood

during rainy season is incomparable.

Due to geographical location and climate of Bangladesh flood is a familiar natural

disaster, The natural calamity makes human life terrible.

This can be termed as disaster. The loss must be brought under control, For this

reason, people are undertaking steps to reduce the damage from flood for a long time.

Flood control measures

Some of the flood control measures are :

A. General management

1. Construction of easily transferable homestead.

2. To make dense forest by the banks of the rivers.

3. To ensure river reigning system,

4. To develop forecasting of flood and cautionary signal managenient.

5. To excavate the ponds, the canals, the rivers, and preserving irrigation water.

6. To build up a permanent administrative body for flood management on a yearly
basis.

EB. Labour intensive and expensive engineering management

1. To increase water flow of the river through dredging.

2. By constructing water reservoir in the vicinity to fully control the water flow.

3, To control and drain water flow from India by constructing dam or embankment.
4. To stop entering saline water in the coastal regions.

5. By changing the river course to ensure water flow directly.

C, Easy engineering management

1. To construct dams on both sides of the river bank to check overflow of river
waler,
2. To provide afforestation all over the country.

3. To make planned drainage system while constructing roads.
220 Geography and Environment

4, To make shelters above the highest flood level in flood prone areas.

5. To make urban protection dams.

Task : To visit a flood affected area for giving relief, prepare a table on the issues
that to be given priority. make a plan on it.

Flood hinders normal life and development work of the country. So, it can be said
that flood is a great problem for the people of Bangladesh. Many steps have been
undertaken to control this problem and some steps are under planning process. The
origin of three main rivers of Bangladesh are in China, Nepal, India and Bhutan.
Total catchment area of these three rivers are 15,54,000 kilometres of those only 7
percent area is in Bangladesh. More than 80 percent of water of these rivers come
from outside and 90 percent of water responsible for flood is flowing through these
ihree rivers. So, to control flood and damage. regional and international assistance is
required.

Drought

A. drought is a period of unusually dry weather that persists long enough to
cause environmental or economic problems, such as crop damage and water
supply shortages. Humidity of soil decreases due to rainless condition. For this
reason, soil loses normal characteristics of softness and gets rough.

Rainless or impact of drought

* Agricultural production decreases due to drought in north-east region of
Bangladesh.

Famine oceurs due to food shortage.

In the affected area scarcity of water exists.

Outbreak of various types of disease due to high temperature takes place.

Environment becomes rough.

+ + + + +

Fire incidents take place very often.

Normal activities of man and wild life are hampered due to rainlessness and
drought. By increasing the forest resources through afforestation and reducing
the consumption of underground water these soris of natural disaster can be brought
under control.

2025
2025

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 991

Cyclone

A cyclone is an atmospheric system characterized by the rapid inward circulation
of air masses about a low pressure centre, usually accompanied by stormy often
destructive weather. Storms that begin in the Southern Pacific and Indian ocean
are called Cyclones, Clockwise in the southern hemisphere and counterclockwise in
the northern hemisphere.

Among the most powerful and dangerous natural disasters, cyclone is one of them.

Cyclones are named after the places of origin. In Bangladesh, this type of cyclone
occurs in the months of March-April and October-November (fig. 14.1). Due to
funnel shaped coastal area of south Bangladesh more cyclones occurs here.

Fee Murs foe agehy coortery HABA

Fig. 14.1: Cvelone

Task: Make a list of losses excepting the death toll of people from cyclones in
Bangladesh.

Cyclone is a temporary natural disaster. In the last three decades cyclones occurred
more in the Eastern part of Bangladesh. It happened especially in Chattogram, Cox's
Bazar, Teknaf, Swandip, Hatia, Kutubdia, Urirchar, Char Jabbar, Char Alexandar etc.

Some of the cyclones occurred in the coastal areas of Bangladesh and their years of
occurance and impact is shown isthe table below:
223 Geography and Environment

Table 1: Some of the cyclones occurred in the coastal areas of Bangladesh

Year of occurance Name of the cyclones Number of casualties:
| 12th November, 1970 Tropical cyclone approx 5.00.000
25th November, 1988 Tropical cyclone approx 1.08,000
29th April, 1991 Tropical cyclone approx 5.708
15th November, 2007 Sidr approx 3.447
25th May, 2009 Aila approx 330

River bank erosion

The erosion of material from the side of a river channel occurs, not only by fluvial
processes, but also by groundwater reduction, surface wash, and slope failure.
Rates of erosion vary with bank composition and moisture content, bank vegetation
and the speed of water-fow rates are the highest on the outer bank of meander
bends.

Task : Mention the names of the river following situation.
1 2 3

Causes of river bank erosion

« Climate Change.

« River course and strong current.
* Change of river course.

* Rock content in the river bed.

e Presence of chemical substance,
* Hardness of the transported rock.
* Fault mn the river bed.

*« Deforestation.

Task: How do the causes influence the river bank erosion effectively? Explain two
reasons dividing into groups.

Causes Effective rate

2025
2025

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 223

River bank erosion is a dangerous natural disaster in a small country like Bangladesh.
River erosion takes place more during the rainy season. Particularly, the river

i

bank erosion is caused more during eee

the flood season and it happens in
40 small and big rivers every year.
Sometimes, due to drought, cracks
develop at the river bank and cause

erosion and a chunk of land goes

under water (fig. 14.2). The loss

er

from river bank erosion is irreparable. Hig-1e.2::. River bank eromion

Besides, these socio-economic impact is much higher.

Loss from river bank erosion

River bank erosion is a common problem in Bangladesh being a riverine country.
The loss caused by river bank erosion turns into a great problem, The river bank
erosion causes in and around 410 rivers, tributaries along with the Padma. the
Jamuna, the Meglma, the Tista. People of this country are more or less associated
with the river bank erosion, Among them above 1.5 million people are directly
affected by the river bank erosion. Around 3 lakh people take shelter in different
government and non-government educational institutions, roads and embankments.
Bangladesh loses around 200 crore taka every year. Around 8,700 hectors of
land goes under water due to river bank erosion.

The components which is damaged by the river bank erosion are.

Farm Crops

Cultivable land Domestic animals
Disaster shelter Trees

Electricity poles Irrigation projects
Family property and other resources Social institution
Houses

Task : Show the erosion occurring areas of the Padma and the Jamuna in the map.

River bank erosion is a continuous process in Bangladesh. River bank erosion
process is caused more or less by the rivers and their tributaries The river bank

224 Geography and Environment

erosion occurs in about 100 upazilas in the country. The land owners are badly
affected by river bank erosion from the excessive rainfall in the monsoon from June
to September, They never can recover the lost land. For this reason, the landless
people migrate. They lose their job and social status. As a result, they become the
object of famine and migrate within the cities as floating people.

Earthquake

Since Bangladesh lies far away from the oceans, this country is not supposed
to be an earthquake prone area. But on the north of Bangladesh in Khasia and Jainta
hill of Assam, foothills of Himalayas. Andaman islands and the ocean floor of
Bay of Bengal are earthquake prone areas. Also structural movement is active in
this area. Overall situation indicates that Bangladesh is becoming more vulnerable to

earthquake (fig. 14.3).

There are some tertiary hills. 1 a the eastern side of Bangladesh The folded mountams
. | running in north-south direction
' belongs to the same group of Lusai
mountains of Assam and the Arakan
mountains of Myanmar. Due to the
structural nature, these areas are
earthquake prone.

= The Pleistocene terraces. The Barind
Track, Madhupur and Bhawal Garb
—  * “ and the Lalmai hills are formed from

Fig, 14.3 ; Building destroyed by earthquake old rocks. Other areas are newly formed
alluvial plains. So, fron the point of geological, structure the northern and eastern side

of Bangladesh is earthquake prone area.

Himalayan terrace and the plateau in the north, Arakan Yoma mountains of

Myanmar in the east and in the north-east the Naga-Disang-Jaflong regions have
made it an earthquake prone area.

From 1548 earthquake records are collected for Bangladesh and its surrounding
regions. In 1993 entire Bangladesh has been divided into three earthquake zones.
Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 225

Those are : Zone 1. High risk zone, measuring 7 on Richter scale are the areas of
north and north eastern part of Bangladesh. Zone 2. Medium risk zone. measuring 6
on Richter scale are the areas of middle region. Zone 3. Less risk zone, measuring 5
on Richter scale are the area of south western regions of Bangladesh (fig. 14.4).
Earthquakes occurred in Bangladesh are wiven in the table below.

Table 2 : Some of the earthquakes occured in Bangladesh

Year Richter scale Loss
[12th June, 1897 8.7 Changing river course of the
tiver Brahmaputra.
22nd November, 6.0 Causing little damages in
1997 Chattogram city.
27th April. 2008 5.1 Causing no damages but
created panic,

Source: Banglapedia

What is to be done in earthquake

Electricity line has to be disconnected al | OQne should stand still holding any raaierial
home during earthquake. Gas connection | during earthquake if one is traveling
should be disconnected. One should get | by train or car.

oul. from house as soon as possible.

Try to get down as quickly as possible | A fearful situation may be caused
during earthquake if you are in a lift. | by the earthquake while in the market,
Try to contact the maintenance officer | cinema hall. and shopping mall etc. Fire
if you are stuck in the lift. may start which is normal. In this
situation it is better to sit down or lie
down and when the situation improves
one should leave the place quickly.

Do not stand under large building or structure when you are out of home. Stand in a

open space or playing field.

Forma-28, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
226

Geography and Environment

Earthquake

Zone Coefficient

[Sj Zone | 0.08 g

[__] Zone Il 0.059 \.
[] Zone til 0.04 g a,

Fig. 14.4: Earthquake zones of Bangladesh

Task : Make a list of items which can save you from the earthquake.

2025
2025

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 227

In Bangladesh earthquake takes place from ancient times. Due to the structural
cause earthquake happens in our country. As the underground water level is falling
rapidly some places are losing natural balance. Dhaka city is prone to earthquake
due to underground water level depletion. For its growing population it is becoming
more risky.

Essential Measures

1. Massive advertising is needed to make public awareness about the earthquake.

2. Building code and structural code of Building must be mandatory in the
construction of building across the country,

3. The policies for building construction of RAJUK should be amended according
to the present situation.

4. The roads should be widened across the country.

3. The machineries which are used in rescuing after the earthquake should be
handed over enlisted names by to Disaster Management Bureau and preserved
at the district commissioner’s office.

6. In the risky areas a team of voluntary workers has to be organized and trained.
7. In disaster affected areas Police and Navy should use "Dog Squad" for relief work.
8. There should be some field hospitals in affected works.

9, Atomic Energy Centre should have direct communication with meteorology
offices of Dhaka, Chattogram, Rangpur, and Sylhet.

Task ; What issues are important after a major earthquake? Discuss.

Tsunami

Tsunami is the larze ocean wave created from an earthquake or voleanic eruption.
Tsunami does not happen in Bangladesh, It happened only in the distant past m
2nd April 1762 in Cox's Bazar and its adjoining. In the coastal region of Arakan in

Myanmar a 7.5 Richter scale earthquake was the cause of Tsunami in the Bay of

228 Geography and Environment

bengal. For the Tsunami happened in the Bay of Bengal due to the earthquake in the
sea of Andaman in 1941, the east coast of India was greatly damaged. As a result,
5000 lives were lost. On 26 December 2004, an earthquake struck off the Indonesian

island of simua-lue, triggering a tsunami that killed a huge member of people.
Disaster management

Disaster management is kind of practical science wlich includes the activities of

proper observation and prevention though disaster preparedness and disaster response

and recovery.
The main objectives of disaster management :

{a) To avoid or reduce of the ammount of loss of lives. property and environment
which are damaged during the natural disaster.

(b) To distribute the relief materials and to rehabilitate the affected people as early as
possible.

(c) To work after the disaster in order to recover and vo back to normaly.

Disaster management circle :

Disaster occurance and its impact

Preparedness come nee

Recovery

Mitigation

Prevention Development

The main elements of disaster management are disaster prevention, disaster

2025
2025

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 229

mitigation and disaster preparedness. We have to take elaborate programme lo
face the disaster. The disaster management factors are response, recovery and

development. The other management factors include rescue and development.
Prevention

The prevention activities can bring the success in the case of reduction of damages
in the natural disasters. The structural and the infrastructural facilities are available
to prevent the disasters. Different kinds of structural construction activities were
implemented, such as building embankments, construction of shelters, construction
of pucca and strong houses, river excavation etc. As structural mitigation is very
expensive, poor countries cannot afford it. The infrastructural mitigation which
means training, raising public awareness, preparedness etc is less expensive.
Mitigation

Disaster mitigation means keeping of disasters at bay and the preparedness to face
disaster, The disaster mitigation includes construction of pucea and strong building,
crop diversification, formulating policies for using the land properly, economic
development, shifting people to the less risky areas, institutional structure etc. The
government has been working for the construction of embankment, excavation of the

rivers, building shelter, afforestation etc. wiih its limiied resources.
Preparedness

The main elements of disaster management are disaster prevention, disaster
Mitigation and disaster preparedness. We have to take elaborate program me to

face the disaster. ‘The disaster managerial elements are response, recovery and
development,

Response

Response is only a part of disaster management. Response is essential after the
disaster. Response includes the activities of shifting the vulnreralbe people to safe

placesearching and recovery, estimating the amount of relief and rehabilitation.
230 Geography and Environment

Recovery

Recovery means bringing everything back to normaly through rebuilding of
environmental social and economic ambiance and infrastructure. In this case the
concerned authority needs the assistance and cooperation of public, non-

government voluntary and international organizations to meet the challenge.

Development

The development activities come after recovering the affected areas from disaster

and they should consider the geographical and environmental issues,

Coastal disaster management

In the coastal regions of Bangladesh, cyclone and tidal waves are the major disasters.
So, the steps taken for the disaster management are mosily applicable for the
coastal areas of Bangladesh. Usually the other areas of Bangladesh are affected by
river erosion, flood and earthquake. [he natural disasters like cyclone, tornado,

drought andexcessive rainfall are common in Bangladesh.

The major prevention of natural disaster is prior information, through weather
forecast. Bangladesh Weather Directorate provides the weather forecast regularly,
Sparrso is a public organization for space research. Sparrso provides the satellite
images of clouds regularly to the meteorological department for weather forecast and
signal.

Our armed forces help out in emergency situation by cooperating with the
civil administration in treatment, rescue, distributing relief goods and rehabilitation.
Bangladesh Radio and ‘Television play an important role in providing information and
signal about disaster. In addition to that the non-government organizations such
as Oxfam, Disaster forum, Care Bangladesh, Caritas, Proshika, CCDB, BDPC.
[Bangladesh disaster preparation centre] etc. play significant role in disaster

mangement, We have to live with the natural disaster. If we can maintain the disaster

2025
2025

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 231

management and preparedness programme, we can successfully reduce the sufferings
caused by disaster, and will be able to save lives, property and environment.
However awareness raising is also very important. We have to campaign at
personal, family, village, union, upazila and district levels for ensuring the appropriate

action of disaster management.

Exercise

Multiple choice questions

1. What is the average annual rainfall in Bangladesh?
a 2100 mm b. 2200 mm

e. 2300 mm d. 2400 mm

2. The objective of disaster management is —
i. toreduce the amount of loss.
ii. to ensure the relief and rehabilitation.

ii. to perform the rescue activities properly.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iand ii b. Land iii

c. iiand it d. i, itand i
Read the text below and answer questions 3 and 4;

Recently a cyclone in Shvammagar upazila caused less of lives and properties.
Ratique and his friends arranged the distribution of dry food among the affected
people. They also arranged for the primary treatment.

3. The activities done by Rafique and his friends are called —

a. Prevention b. Response

c. Rescue d. Recovery
232

Geography and Environment

Reduction of loss from natural disasters is—

i. to build the cyclone shelters.

i. to arrange training about the disaster.

ii. to increase ihe mass awareness.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iandii b. iand iti

c. tland iii d, i, iiand iil

Creative questions

1,

The family of Shishir lived on the bank of the river Jamuna. For river erosion they
had to take shelter in a nearby place. There are many other families who can't
get back to their normal lives being affected by the disaster.

a. What type of disaster is river erosion?
b. What do you understand by disaster management?

ce. Explain the reasons of natural disaster by which Shishir's family has been
affected.

d. What type of measures should be taken to get Shishir's family back to the
normal life? Give your opinion.

Rupom was busy at his reading table in his vallage. Suddinly he felt a jerk and

saw a few suining around them. He also saw people running to and fro outside
his house.

a. What is hazard?
b, What do you understand by mitigation? Explain.
¢. What is the reason of Rupom's unusual experience?

cd. What would happen if the city of Dhaka had the same experience? Explain,

2025
