2025

CHAPTER NINE
Marketing

Rafina is the student of class ten at Rasulpur village. Her father is a renowned
vegetable farmer in their village. He grows various types of vegetables including
Okra, tomato, hyacinth bean, bottle gourd, sweet gourd, brinjal etc. It is very
wonderful to see the growing vegetables in the field. A lot of people from the
village buy vegetables from him when he plucks them at the field. The rest of the
vegetables are washed and cleaned and taken to market for selling arranged
beautifully on a large basket. He ts also careful so that the vegetables are not
damaged. Ratina during her off days helps her father in the vegetable field for
caring and plucking them. People from neighboring village also like his
vegetable and buy them. She feels proud of her father's reputation,

In the above mentioned story. growing vegetables, conserving and selling it to
the ultimate buyer, all tasks are referred to Marketing. In this chapter, we shall
learn about the concept of marketing, activities, advertisement and other aspects

of marketing.
= . | .
| J j .
F | |
Goods and services Price Promotion

os @>
Disinbution Research

After reading this chapter, we shall be able to —

e Describe the concept of marketing.

* Explain the activities of marketing.

« Describe the concept and types of distribution channel.

* Explain the marketing process of different goods

* Explain the concept of advertisement and its importance

* Mention the name of the media for advertisement and explain
their activities
Describe the concept of salesmanship and quality of a good salesman,

f
118 Business Entrepreneurship

Concept of Marketing

Generally, buying and selling of goods and services can be termed as
marketing. But, in real sense the concept of marketing is wider. Marketing
refers to all the activities related to supplying the goods and services from its
manufacturer to the consumers. It means that marketing 1s the combination of
all the activities from buying, selling, transportation, storing, standardizing,
gtading etc.

Marketing has special importance in todays business world. Because,
success of a business not only depends upon the production of the products,
it is also necessary to arrange to supply them to the consumers. Through
marketing, the consumers can get quality goods and services. Effective
matketing helps to increase production. With the improvement of marketing,
industry, commerce and services also develop. It helps to create huge
employment opportunity.

Functions of Marketing

Marketing works as a bridge between the manufacturer and consumers.
Marketing helps to create utility of possession, place and time of goods and
services. The functions of marketing are analyzed below:

1, Buying: Buying is one of the main jobs of marketing. Goods and services
are bought to use or reselling. Through buying of products and services
ownership is established,

2. Selling: Another important task of marketing is to bring the buyer and
seller together. Through selling the ownership of goods is transferred.
Estimating the demand for products, buyer searching, pricing all are
related to selling.

3. Transportation: Transportation creates the utility of place for a product
and generates demand. Goods and services are transported from one place
to another. In this way the products reach to the consumer from the
manufacturer. With the help of transportation we have been able to use the
electronic products manufactured in China. Similarly, shrimp/prawn or tea
of our country is consumed by the people of other country.

4. Warehousing: Warehousing creates the utility of time of goods. At every

stage of marketing. storing of goods is necessary. Many goods are grown
at a particular season of the year and used over the whole year. To meet the
demand all round the year, goods are stored in warehouse. For example,

2025
2025

Marketing 119

Activity — 1: On the basis of discussion above try to find out the importance
of Marketing through team work.

potato and tomato grown in the winter are available during the whole
year with the help of warehousing,

Standardizing: Pricing of products is possible by standardizing them
on the basis of quality, size, color and taste. As a result, the marketing of
product becomes easier and velocity of sales increases.

Grading: Classification of products on the basis of quality is called
erading.Crenerally, grading is done considering the weight, size and
quality of product. As a result, sales become easier.

. Packaging: Covering the products to look good and attractive and

protect them from breakage is called packaging. Acceptability and sale
of Industrial product such as freeze, television, soap and agricultural
product such as pastured milk, fish and meat to the consumers depends
upon packaging.

Collection of Information: Collection of information related to goods
and services is also a task of marketing. ‘lo know the demand and supply
of a product, buyers or consumer's choice and taste; gathering of
information is necessary.

Consumer Analysis: Another important function of marketing is to
analyze the consumers’ taste, demand, characteristics and interest.
Because, if this task is not done properly, the risk of the business
increases and expansion of business is hindered.

« Concept of Distribution Channel

Sometimes, the manufacturers sell their produced goods to the consumers
directly. But, in most of the cases, direct selling to the consumer is not
possible. As a result, presence of intermediaries becomes necessary.
120 Business Entrepreneurship

Business intermediaries work as bridge between the manufacturer and the
consumer. Helps from the wholesaler and retailer is to be taken as business
intermediaries in buying and selling as part of marketing. Distribution
channel is known as the process to reach the goods and service from its
manufacturer to the consumer. For example, consumers do not buy tea from
its manufacturer which is produced at tea garden, rather the wholesaler buys
it from the manufacturer. Then, he sells it to the retailer. Consumers buy tea
from the retailer. In this way, the products reach the destination of consumer
through a particular channel.

Distribution Channel and Marketing of Different Goods:

Distribution channel depends upon the nature and types of goods and
services, Distribution channel of different products are shown below:

1. Direct Sales: When the goods manufactured are directly sold to the
consumers without the help of any intermediaries it is called direct
distribution. Some agricultural products such as paddy, fruits, vegetables
and industrial products such as molasses, sugar etc, are directly sold to the
CONSUMETS.

2. Selling through Retailer: In some cases, to sell the goods and services,
assistance is taken from the retailer as business intermediaries. The
manufacturers sell their goods to the retailer and the retailer supplies them
to the consumers as per demand. Normally, paddy, rice, potato, soap,
biscuit, vermicelli etc. are sold and distributed through this channel. The
raanufacturers sell the product to the retailer at local hat and bazaar.

Diagram of various distribution channels:

Manufacturer si =

* = Consumer
Manufacturer 9 | —————> Retailer ————_»| Consumer
Manufacturer | Wholesaler Retailer +e} Consumer

Manutacturer

/—— >

Representative or Agent

|——»

Consumer

Manufacturer /-—*

Representative or Agent! _.|] Retailer |»

Consumer

2025
Marketing 121

3. Selling through Retailer & Wholesaler: Through this process, the
manufacturer sells the products to the wholesaler and wholesaler sells
them to the retailer and the retailer sells the products to the consumer.
Places where agricultural products are grown in vast, the wholesaler buys
goods from those places. Normally, paddy, jute, mustard, mango, banana
and different types of vegetables are bought by the wholesalers. On the
other hand, industrialized products such as paper, pens ctc. are also
bought by the wholesalers. At last those products reach the consumers via
retailer.

4, Selling through Representative or Agent: In many cases, the
manutacturers appoint representatives or agents at different places of the
country and sell their products through them to the consumer. Various
types of electronic goods such as TV, Freeze, Fan, agricultural products
like fertilizer, seeds etc. are distributed through this channel.

Selling through Representatives/ Agents and Retailer: In this process,
the manufacturer supplies the goods to the representatives or agents as
per demand and then the agents supply their products to the retailer with
the help of their own transportation. The consumers then can buy the
products from the retailer, Various types of soft drinks and cosmetics are
sold through this distribution channel in our country.

aT

Activity -2 : Try to make a list of the daily products bought by your
family and identify which distribution channel is used for them.

me NO Go] 1) oy a) oe) a] |

0.

e Concept of Advertising
After closing of the school, Irfan saw a person distributing a paper at the school
gate.He was also given one. It was written that a new stationary shop was going

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10. Forraa-16
122 Business Entrepreneurship

to be opened at their bazaar. Where, they will be able to find books, papers, pen,
pencil, bag and other related things at a cheaper rate. On the inaugural occasion,
every buyer will be presented with a colorful calendar. After returning home, he
showed the paper to his elder brother and he told that it was a leaflet. These are
distributed for the campaign of any business.

From the above event, the leaflet distributed for the general buyers of their shop
is a media of advertisement. Advertisement is strategy or way to attract the
attention of the mass to a particular product or service. Every day, we see or hear
a lot of different attractive advertisement on television, radio and paper. Other
media for advertisement are leaflet, magazine, transport, billboard, signboard,
internet etc.

Billboard of an advertisement (Teletalk)

Different Types of Media of Advertising

There are various medias for advertisement. A single media is not used for all
kinds of business or products. The media for advertisement is selected on the
basis of demand, quality, price and buyer of the product. Different media for
advertisement and their nature is mentioned below;

Media for Advertisement Type
Newspaper Different pages orparticular pages of various
dailies or weeklies
Periodicals Weeklies, fortnightlies, monthlies and annual

periodicals,consumer’s periodicals, agricultural
periodicals, women periodicals, finance
periodicals etc

Circular Letters Circular letters mentioning the product’s quality.
characteristics, price and available place.

20235
2025

Marketing

123

Hoarding Advertising plate at important place of road side

Poster Beautiful picture and interesting writings on |
poster at places of mass movement.

Television Visible and hearable attractive slide, ad |

Radio Spot advertisement, Courtesy Advertisement, |
Commercial Advertisement, Jingle, National
advertisement, Regional advertisement |

Cinema Showing slides at the starting of the movie,

during the interval and at the end of the movie

Window Display

Decorating different products in a glass cage.

Fair/Exhibition

Advertisement through participating — in|
Boishakhi mela, Industry Fair, Trade Fair,
Cottage Industry Fair, Meenabazaar etc.

Sample

Delivering the buyer with samples. Generally,
Pharmaceutical companies, book seller,
cosmetics seller distribute samples of their |
products

Neon Sign

Lighting of various products through neon sign |
at important places in the city .

Car Advertising

Advertising on various public — transports. |
Cinema, Soap, Cigarette, Soft drinks all these
products use transport advertisement.

Others

Banner, Festoons, Signboard, Sticker, Gas |
Balloon, Sky advertisement.

Importance of Advertisement

Advertisement is a very effective media for distribution of products and services
at this competitive business world for the small, medium and large business
enterprises, The importance of advertisement is described below:

]. Through advertisement, the quality of product, its price and uses are revealed
to the mass. As a result, demand for the product increases which increases the
production, sales and profit.

2, Advertisement helps to enhance the goodwill of the business which is a
important asset of an organization. Increased goodwill helps expansion of the
business. Advertisement also helps to maintain the goodwill.

3, Advertisement brings velocity to the campaign of the product. Demand of
the product, sales and total production increases which results in increase
gross domestic production.
124

Business Entrepreneurship

Advertisement creates demand for a product and businessmen ensure to
supply the product accordingly. Equilibrium is maintained between
demand and supply and stability of price is established.

. Because of advertisement, market of the product expands and business

increases. As a result, employment opportunity generates and
unemployment problem is solved.

The general people become acquainted with new products and service
with the help of advertisement. As a result, propensity to consumption
among them increases. Their standard of living also increases with
consuming quality products.

Advertisement helps to create social and ethical awareness which helps to
ensure social welfare and social development. For example, awareness
about quality and inferiority of products, awareness of negative impact of
smoking, awareness about aids, advertisement can play a vital role.

Advertisement awakens the patriotism among people and motivates them
to buy ther own products. "Be proud buying the product of own country"
-this type of advertisement encourages to uphold patriotism and
nationalism.

Activity -3 : Make a list of the products for which you see advertisement
at Various media.

* ¢ #6 @ 8 @

Write down the reason(s) how an advertisement has attracted you.

Name of the Advertisement Reasons for attraction

*
*

£023
2025

Marketing 125

« Concepts of Salesmanship

Salesmanship is the technique or efficiency of a person by which he/she can sell
a product to a person by attracting him with his quality, A salesman earns the
wust of the buyer about the business and products and makes them a permanent
buyer on the basis of long term relationship.

e Qualities of a Good Salesman

The role of a salesman at this competitive busmess world for increase of sales
and success of the business is very significant, In many cases, the success or
failure depends upon the quality of a salesman. A salesman must inherit a
number of good qualities to impress and attract the buyer and consumer to make
them permanent custormer. The qualities of salesman are analyzed below:

Physical Qualities
1. Good looking face: Good looking face can easily attract the attention
of the buyers
2. Good Health: A salesman must be of good health. Because it helps to

attract people
3, Nice smile: Smiling face of the salesman gives the buyers extra motivation

Mental Quality

4. Willingness and cordiality: A salesman must have interest in his
work. Cordiality to the buyer and respect towards self job increases the
goodwill of the business.

5. Confidence: To make goods acceptable to the buyer; the salesman
must be confident.

6. Keen intelligence: Itis necessary to realize the interest, mentality,
attitude of the buyers’ and ability to face unwanting situation with
charm. A salesman must have keen intelligence.

7. Patience: A salesman must have patience.

Ethical Quality

8. Honesty and Trustworthiness: A salesman must show his honesty
and trustworthiness to the buyers through his transaction and dealing

with them. Honesty and trustworthiness make the buyer permanent customer.

9. Decent behavior: A salesman is to be gentle, modest, kind and smart
in his behaviar.

10. Ability to mix with people: A salesman must have the quality to mix
with the customer freely so that he can be friendly with them and convert
them to permanent customer,

11. Gender Awareness: How to behave with different people such as
men - women, boys-girls, aged people, the salesman must have
awareness in this repards.

126

Business Entrepreneurship

12. Positive Attitude: An ideal salesman always keeps positive mentality
about his customers. If any body uses any bitter words about a product
or price, he must be influenced positively with smiling face.

13. Education and experience: A salesman must have sufficient education
and experience so that he can use them when necessary at the business

14. Knowledge of Distribution: A salesman must have efficiency on the
tasks like selection, collection, pricing, standardizing, packaging of products.

15. Efficiency in Accounts: A salesman must have efficiency and knowledge
of pricing and accounting of products.

Activity-4 : Through self analysis, identify the qualities of an ideal Salesman
present in you and which qualities need improvement.

Qualities of Salesman

The qualities you have
(put tick mark)

The qualities need
more improvement
(Put tick mark)

Attractive Personality

Good Health

Nice Smile

Interest and cordiality

Keen Intelligence

Patience

Honesty and
trustworthiness

Ability to mix with
people

Gender Awareness

Education & Experience

Knowledge of
Distribution

Liffictency in accounts

‘Positive Mentality

2025
2025

Marketing 127

EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)

1. What is the main task of marketing?
a. Buying b. Selling
c. Transportation d.Warchousing
2. Why advertisement for a product is done -
a. To increase the price of the product
b. To give the idea about the product
c. To know the market of the product,
d. To create entrepreneur

After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3 & 4:
Mr. Rubel is a cultivator of watermelon. He himself carries and sells the grown
watermelon to the local market. He is trying to find other strategy of selling
goods since the production has increased.

3. Which of the following is Rubel’s distribution channel?
a. Manufacturer > Consumer b. Manufacturer > Retailer
c. Manufacturer > Retailer >Consumer d. Wholesaler > Retailer
4, Using the right distribution channel by Rubel-
i. Reduces the gap between buyer and seller
ii. Buyer gets the product at less price
iii. Distribution functions become easier
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i&ii b. i & iii
c. 1 & iii d. i, a & ii
Creative Question
1. Shovo's selling decreases because of a similar type of new shop is set up
beside him. As a strategy to increase his sales, Shuvo appointed a salesman
who is good looking and well-spoken. After several days his sales return to
the previous level.
a, With what products can be attractive?
b. What ts standardizing? Explain.
c. What qualities Shuvo has considered to recruit the salesman?
d. Evaluate the steps of Shuvo to increase his sales,
128 Business Entrepreneurship

2. There is a new shop name ‘Ador Store’ on the highway. But, for some reasons
the sale of that shop is not good. Recently, the owner of the shop distributed a
leaflet among the houses of the locality with the help of a newspaper hawker
introducing his shop, nature of service, quality of products and name of
different products available. After some days, it was found that number of
customers and sales of the shop are increasing.

a. Who is the last party in the distribution channel?

b. What is grading? Explain
c. What media for advertisement did the owner of Ador Store select?
Explain.

d. ‘Steps taken by the owner is one of the strategies to increase sales’ —
Express your opinion,

Assignment : collect information about the marketing conditions of the products
of a manufacturer in your area and present them in the classroom.

Steps : Collect data through interview, presentation of data, Analysis of
data, Personal opinions.

2025
