2025

Chapter Four
Bioenergetics

Thousands of biochemical reactions are being continuously carried out in the
cells of organisms for the maintenance of life. For these reactions, energy is
somewhat required, The sun is the main source of energy. The green plants
transforming solar energy into chemical energy produce the food carbohydrates
through the process of photosynthesis. Animals and non-green organisms cannot
directly utilize solar energy, They have to depend somehow on green plants for
the energy they require for the maintenance of their life. The main objective of
bioenergetics is to discuss the energy flow through the living system. In this
chapter, these cellular processes are discussed.
@) Aine ena of this chapter, we will be able to-

* explain the role of ATP as the main source of energy in a living cell;

* explain the production of carbohydrates through the process of photosynthesis;

* explain the role of chlorophyll and light in photosynthesis;

* describe the role of factors in photosynthesis;

* evaluate the dependence of organism on photosynthesis;

* explain respiration;

* explain the concept and significance of aerobic and anaerobic respiration;

* draw comparisons between photosynthesis and respiration:

* examine the necessity of chlorophyll and light in the process of photosynthesis;

* perform the experiment to demonstrate the release of energy in the form of
heat during respiration;

* understand the contribution of plants in preparing food for organisms and
learn conscious behaviors towards plants.

2025
2025

4.1 Bioenergetics and the role of ATP

The basic mechanism of production and utilisation of energy in the body of a
living organism is its bio-energy. This is nol very different [rom the definition of
energy given in Physics. The energy we get from making and breaking of
chemical bonds in the molecules found in biological organisms is called by this
hame. Living organisms continuously collect energy from the environment,
transform them from one form into another, sometimes preserve them, and
release them again in the environment.

ATP
et nd d Release
Pad jp Triphosphate. of Enegery
Enepery ak

Diphosphate

Figure: 4.01 The amount of energy needed to be supplied from outer source to produce
Adenosine triphosphate( ATP) by combining Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and
phosphate, the same amount of energy is relensed when ATP is broken down inte ADP
and inorganic phosphate. These two chemical reactions continue in cyclic order in living
cells.

Adenine is a fundamental component of DNA and RNA. It is a nitrogen base.
Adenosine is composed of one molecule of adenine attached to a pentose (with
five carbons) ribose sugar molecule. Adenosine can be linked to a chain of one,
two, or three phosphate groups to form Adenosine Monophosphate (AMP),
Adenosine Diphosphate (ADP), or Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP), Energy
needs to be supplied from an outside source for the process of adding phosphate
and this is called phosphorylation. In the reverse process, energy is released
when a phosphate group is removed, This chemical reaction is known 4s
dephosphorylation. Note here that 7.3 kilocalorie (approx. 30.55 kilojoules) is
captured and remains stored in the phosphate group of each mole of ATP.
Two organelles of a living cell collect energy from the environment and
transform them into a form usable for the host cell. These two organelles are the

mitochondria and the plastid. Both have a set of special complexes of molecules
called Electron Transport System whose function is to store received energy

from external source of energy as the energy of phosphate group in ATP. In case
of mitochondria it may be the source of that energy is nutrients (such as:
Glucose) or any transactional energy (such as: NADH2) and in case of plastid
(specially chloroplast) it may be the source of that energy is sunlight or the
photon come from another suitable source. All physiological functions, from
muscle contraction to sensitivity, swallowing to digesting food, respiration to
speaking, shouting to smiling and, physical growth to reproduction, controlling
body temperature to maintain natural cell volume: everything is completed by
energy released from the breaking down of the chemical bond of ATP. The food
we eat is oxidized, and the energy released from this oxidization is used to create
ATP through phosphorylation. It breaks down when energy is needed, and
combines taking energy from food. This is like a rechargeable battery. ATP
stores energy and supplies energy for other reactions when necessary. ATP is
therefore called Biological coin or energy coin.

4.2 Photosynthesis

An important feature of green plants is that they produce carbohydrates from
carbon dioxide and water in the presence of sunlight. In green plants, the process
of the formation of carbohydrates is called photosynthesis. In this process, light
energy is transformed into chemical energy. The food produced by the green plant
is used to accomplish the metabolic processes required for its survival, and
remaining food is stored in fruits, stems or leaves. The existence of mankind and
other living creatures depends on the food produced and stored in plants. The
essential components for photosynthesis are (1) chlorophyll (2) light (3) water and
(4) carbon dioxide. Photosynthesis is a biocherucal reaction shown below:

| 6COy + 12H,0 ean CgH190,¢ + 6Hy0 + 602

The mesophyll tissue of a leaf is the main site of photosynthesis. Terrestrial green

plants absorb water from the soil through their roots and send it to the chloroplasts
in the mesophyll tissue. CO, trom atmosphere is absorbed through the stomata,
and is sent to the same chloroplasts. Aquatic plants absorb the CO, which is

f025
dissolved in water. The presence of CO, in the atmosphere and water is 0.03%
and 0.3% respectively. So, the rate of photosynthesis is higher in aquatic plants
than that of land plants.

Mesophyll cell

} |~ Mesophvyll tissue

Chloroplast

Figure: 4.02 Photosynthesis
Oxygen and water are by-products of photosynthesis. So, it is an oxidation-

reduction process. In this process HO is oxidised and CO, is reduced,

4.2.1 The Process of Photosynthesis

Photosynthesis is a long and complex process. In 1905, British physiologist
Blackman divided the process into two phases. They are the (1) light dependent
phase and the (2) light independent phase.

(1) Light dependent phase: Light energy is essential in the light dependent phase
of photosynthesis. In this phase, solar energy is transformed into chemical energy.
Through this process ATP (Adenosine triphosphate) and NADPH (reduced
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) and H+ (Hydrogen ion or proton)
are produced. Energy converted from the photon is stored i the phosphate group
of ATP as the chemical bonding energy. Chlorophyll plays a very important role
Forma-09, Biology Class-9-10
Stroma
Gaurd cell
Companion cell

Figure : 4.03 A Stoma

in the production ef ATP and NADPH+H+. Chlorophyll molecules absorb
photons from light, and with the help of the energy obtained from the photon
absorbed, ATP is formed through the addition of an inorganic phosphate with
ADP. The process of the formation of ATP is called photophosphorylation.

ADP + Pi —““—» ATP

chioraphyl!

Oxygen, proton/hydrogen ion and electrons are released through the hydrolysis
of water with the help of sunlight and chlorophyll. The process is called the
photolysis of water.

ATP is produced through the process of photophosphorylation, The electrons
reduce NADP, and produce NADPH+H". This process of producing ATP and
NADPH+H" is called assimilatory power.

(2) Light independent phase or dark phase: No light is directly required in the
light independent phase, although the process can be carried out in presence of
light. Atmospheric CQ, enters the cells through the stomata of the leaves. In this
phase, carbohydrates are produced by the reduction of CO, with the help of ATP
and NADPH+H* that was produced in the light phase. In green plants, the
pathways of CO, reduction have been identified, and they are briefly discussed
here: (a) Calvin cycle (b) Hatch & Slack pathway and ( c) Crassulacean acid
metabolism (CAM), Of these, the first two cycles are briefly discussed below,

(a) Calyin cycle or C4 cyele: The pathway of fixing CO2 is named alier its
discoverers Calvin-Benson-Bassham (CBB) cycle or simply the Calvin cycle.
Melvin Ellis Calvin was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1961 for this discovery. In
most plants, carbohydrates are produced through this process. Because the first

2025
£23

stable compound, formed by this process is the 3-carbon compound
phosphoglyceric acid, so this pathway is called C, pathway and the plants where
this cycle takes place is called C, plants.

Grannum disc
or thylakoid
(Light reaction center)

Stroma
(Dark reaction center)

tt
Oo, Carbohydrate

Figure : 4.04 Light dependent phase and Calvin Cycle
(b) Cy cycle or Hatch and Slack pathway: In 1966, two Australian scientists,
M.D. Hatch and C.R. Slack discovered the reduction pathway of CO. The first
stable substance formed in this pathway is 4-carbon based Oxaloacetic acid. So
this pathway is also called C4 pathway and the plants where this cycle takes place
is called C, plants.

In C, plants, both the Hatch and Slack cycle and the Calvin cycle are carried out
simultaneously. The rate of photosynthesis in Cy plants is higher than that of in
C; plants. Some examples of C4 plants are maize, sugareanes, other plants of
erass type, motha grass and amaranthus.

4.2.2 Role of Chlorophyll in Photosynthesis

There is a direct relationship between the rate of photosynthesis and the amount
of chlorophyll in the leaves, because only chlorophyll can capture solar energy,
We know the old chloroplasts are disintegrated, and then new chloroplasts are
synthesised. The rate of photosynthesis is dependent on the rate of regeneration
of chloroplasts or the components of chloroplasts. For the maintenance of
photosynthesis, different components of chlorophyll are required to be
regenerated speedily in large amounts. But, too much chlorophyll in the cell
results in the shortage of enzymes and the rate of photosynthesis slows down.

4.2.3 Role of Light in Photosynthesis

‘The importance of light in photosynthesis is immense. For the production of
carbohydrates from HO and COs, the source of required energy is light. Sunlight
also takes part in the development of chlorophyll. With sunlight and when
stomata are open, CO, can enter the leaves, and take part in the production of
food, But only a small proportion of the light falling on the leaf, is used in
photosynthesis. Red, blue, orange and purple portions of the visible spectrum
function better than that of green and yellow in the process of photosynthesis.
The rate of photosynthesis increases with the increase of light up to a definite
limit. If the amount of light mereases too much, enzymes disintegrate and cause
the production of chlorophyll to reduce. Consequently the rate of photosynthesis
also decreases. Photosynthesis, generally, is carried out well with light of wave
length between 400nm-480nm and 680nm.

4.2.4 Factors affecting photosynthesis

Besides light and chlorophyll, photosynthesis is also affected by other factors.
Some of the factors are external and some are internal. These factors are
mentioned below.

(a) External factors

Light: It has already been discussed.

Carbon dioxide: Photosynthesis cannot be carried out without carbon dioxide.
Food produced by this process is formed from the reduction of carbon dioxide.
The concentration of carbon dioxide in atmosphere is 0.03% but, plants can use
carbon dioxide upto 1% concentration. So, the rate of photosynthesis increases
with the increase of carbon dioxide upto 1% in atmosphere. If the amount of
carbon dioxide is increased to a very high level, acidic conditton in the cells of
mesophyll tissue increases and stomata get closed, so the rate of photosynthesis,
then decreases.

Temperature: Temperature as a factor plays a very important role in the process
of photosynthesis. At a very low temperature (around 0°C) and a very high
temperature (above 45°C), photosynthesis cannot be carried out. The optimum
temperature for photosynthesis is from 22°C to 30°C. If temperature remains
below 22°C or above 35°C, the rate of photosynthesis will decrease.

Water: In photosynthesis the H+ (Hydrogen ion) required for the reduction of
CQ>,, forthe production of carbohydrates comes from water. In scarcity of

2025
2025

water, the guard cells of stomata become flaccid, and so, the entry of CO, is
disrupted. In the excessive scarcity of water, pholosynthesis may be completely
stopped as the enzymes become inactivated.

Oxygen: If the concentration of oxygen increases in the atmosphere, the rate of
photosynthesis decreases. Conversely, the rate of photosynthesis increases with
the decrease of oxygen in the atmosphere. However, photosynthesis stops
completly in the absence of oxygen.

Mineral nutrient clements: Nitrogen and magnesium are two main
components of chlorophyll. A leaf cannot synthesize chlorophyll in absence of
iron, and consequenily, the leaves become yellow. Thus, the rate of photosynthesis
decreases if there are low levels of minerals in the soil.

Chemical substances: The process of photosynthesis is inhibited or completly
stopped if the chloroform, hydrogen sulfide, methane or any poisonous gases
are present in the air.

(b) Internal factors

Chlorophyll: It has already been discussed.

Age and number of leaves: Leaves that are too young or too old contain very
little chlorophyll. This is why the rate of photosynthesis in them is very low.
With the aging of leaves, the number of chloroplasts also increases. The rate of
photosynthesis in the middle-aged leaves is the highest. With the increase of the
number of leaves, the rate of photosynthesis is accelerated.

Amount of carbohydrates: During photosynthesis, if the conduction of
carbohydrates is low. carbohydrates become clogged im the leaves. In the

evening. the rate of photosynthesis is low because of the accumulation of
carbohydrates that were produced earlier.

Potassium: The rate of photosynthesis is found to become slow if there is a
shortage of potassium, since potassium likely plays a role as a catalyst in the
process.

Enzymes: Several enzymes are required for the process of photosynthesis.
4.2.5 Importance of photosynthesis in living world

Photosynthesis is the most important biochemical process in the world. Through
the process, a bridge is developed between living things and sunlight. The
importance of photosynthesis can be understood from the discussion below.
Observing the vast impact of this process on earth, some scientists have named it
the Bio-Chemical factory.
The sun is the main source of all energy. Only green plants can transform solar
energy into chemical energy and store as food through photosynthesis.

No animal can produce its food itself. The foods we eat such as rice, bread, fruits,
vegetables, fish, meat, milk, egg etc., are directly or indirectly derived from green
plants. So, all animals are completely dependent on green plants for their food,
and the green plants produce food through the process of photosynthesis. It can
be said that the food for all plants and animals on earth is produced through the
physiological process of photosynthesis. Photosynthesis is very important for
maintaining the balance of different components in the atmosphere. especially
the ratio of CO, and O,. The presence of O, and CO, gases in the atmosphere is
20.95% and 0.033% respectively.

For normal growth and survival of plants and animals on earth, these two gases
must be present in atmosphere within a normal limit. If the amount of the gases
is different than normal, the atmospheric environment becomes hostile to living
world. We know that cellular respiration is taking place in all living organisms
(both plants or animals) all the time. In respiration, organisms use O, and release
COs, If only respiration would have occurred in nature, a shortage of O» and a
surplus of CO, would definitely be found in the atmosphere. As green plants
absorb COs and release O, through the process of photosynthesis, the correct
ratio of O, and CQ» in the atmosphere 1s maintained. Nowadays a dangerous
situation has occurred as the ratio between these two gases is changing due to the
excessive cutting of trees. So we should plant trees in large numbers.

The progress of human civilization is dependent on photosynthesis directly and
indirectly. Foods, clothes, industrial materials (such as nylon, rayon, paper,
cellulose, timber, rubber), medicine (such as quinine, morphine), and fuel coal,
petrol, gas are produced from plants. So, if photosynthesis does not occur,
human civilization would be ruined, and the living world would be destroyed.
This is why photosynthesis is the most important biochemical process in the
living world.

Not only that there was no gaseous oxygen about 5 billon years ago when the
earth was created. Through the process of photosynthesis, primitive plant
produced oxygen which helped to make the earth habitable for us.

2023
2025

Activity-1: Experiment to show the necessity of light in the process of
photosynthesis.

Essentials: A potted plant with green leaves, black paper, 95% ethyl alcohol,
1% iodine solution, black paper, clips, water, petridish. test tube, beaker,
bunsen bummer or spirit lamp, dropper, forcep.
Procedure: The potted plant should be kept in
a dark place for 48 hours so that the leaves
become starchless. A part of a leaf on the
potted plant kept in the dark needs to be
covered with a piece of black paper and
clipped in such a way that no sunlight can
reach it. Then. the potted plant should be kept
in sunlight for 6-7 hours. After 6-7 hours the
leaf, plucked off and black paper removed, will
be boiled in water for several minutes. Then,
in order to make it chlorophyll free, the leaf
should be again boiled in 95% ethyle alcohol
until it becomes laded. Now the leaf is to be
washed im water and drained with iodine
solution. In order to avoid any accident
while boiling in alcohol, the test tube containing alcohol and the leaf should

Figure: 4.05 Essentialily of light
in Photosysthesis

be heated inside water in a beaker, instead of giving it any direct heat.

Observation: When the leaf is picked up from iodine solution, we can see
that except the covered part, the remaining part of the leaf becomes blue,
deep purple or black.

Conclusion: Because of the chemical reaction between starch and iodine,
starch will turn blue, deep purple or black. As the sunlight cannot reach the
part of the leaf covered with the black paper, starch cannot be formed there
through photosynthesis. As starch is not formed in that part of the leaf, it

cannot tun blue, deep purple or black after reaction with the iodine |

solution. Since sunlight has fallen on the remaining parts of the leaf, starch

was produced there. It proves that light is essential for the formation of

starch during photosynthesis.

Precautions

(1) Before performing the experiment. the potted plant should be kept in dark
for sometime (about 48 hours).

(2) Black paper should be of such quality that no light can pass through it.

(3) Before the test, the potted plant should be kept in sunlight at least for 6- 7 hours.

(4) While boiling the leaf into alcohol, it is better not to use direct heat.

| Activity-2; Experiment to show the necessity of chlorophyll in the process of

photosynihesis,

Essentials: Manihot or variegated leat, alcohol, iodine solution, water,
petridish, test tbe, bunsen burner, dropper, beaker.

Procedure: A manihot or variegated leaf is to be picked at noon and its green
portion marked. After boiling the leaf for a few minutes in water, it is then be
boiled in alcohol until its colour has faded. Now, after washing the leaf in
water, dip it in iodine solution. In order to avoid accidents while boiling in
alcohol, the test tube containing the alcohol and the leaf, should be heated in
water in a beaker instead of applying direct heat.

Observation: Only the green portion of the leaf becomes blue, deep purple,
or black after the leaf from iodine solution.

Conclusion: Only the green portion of the leaf produced carbohydrate
through photosynthesis, because of the presence of chlorophyll. Since there is
no chlorophyll in the non-green (orange or yellow) portion, carbohydrate was
not produced, Because of the carbohydrate, the green portion becomes blue or
deep purple or black in the iodine solution.

Precaution : While boiling the leaf im alcohol, it is better not to use direct heat.

f025
4.3 Respiration

In previous classes you learned about respiration and how through respiration,
organisms accomplish growth and derive energy. In this chapter, a more detailed
discussion will be made on respiration. Energy is required to maintain the process
of lite of organisms for activities like locomotion, healing of injury, growth and
reproduction. We have already known that the main source of energy is the sun.
Through photosynthesis. plants store solar energy in carbohydrates as potential
energy. The stored energy in the food cannot be directly used by the organisms for
the maintenance of their life. Durimg respiration, this potential energy is converted
into kinetic energy (ATP) in the form of heat, which supplies the necessary energy
for various physiological activities. Carbohydrates, fats, proteins and organic
acids can be processed and consumed through this process. These complex
compounds in the bodies of living organisms, are broken down into simple
compounds and later transformed into ATP. At normal temperature, the process
of respiration occurs in the living organisms around the clock. But, in the
growing parts of a plant, such as in floral and lateral buds. germinating seeds,
and the tip of stem and root, the rate of transpiration is very high. Respiration
takes place in the cytoplasm and mitochondria of a living cell.

4.3.1 Types of respiration

Based on the availability of oxygen during respiration, the process is divided into
two types: (1) Aerobic respiration (2) Anaerobic respiration.

(1) Aerobic respiration: The respiration process, which requires oxygen and
produces CO, HO and a large amount of energy by oxidising the respiratory
materials (carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, different kinds of organic acids)
completely, is called aerobic respiration. Aerobic respiration is the typical
respiratory process of planis and animals. It can be expressed with the following
equation:

 GeHOe + 60, _filttrentemzymes  gco, + 6H0 +eeey(686 k Cal / Mole) |
_ -glucase

Forma-10, Biology Class-9-10
Through aerobic respiration, one molecule of glucose when completely oxidised
produces 6 molecules of CO, 6 molecules of H,O0 and 38 molecules of ATP.

(2) Anaerobic respiration: Respiration, which occurs in absence of oxygen, is

called anaerobic respiration. That is, in anaerobic respiration, respiratory
substances are partially oxidised with the help of enzymes to produce different
types of organic compounds (ethyl alcohol, lactic acid etc.), CO, and a small
amount of energy,

“CeHinOc _—Sneyme—» 2C2zHs0H + 2CO, +energy(56 k Cal / Mole)
glucose ethyl alcohol |

Anaerobic respiration only occurs in some microorganisms such as in bacteria,
yeast tc.

Short description of aerobic respiration

Aerobie respiration is generally divided into four distinct stages:

Stage 1: Glycolysis

When oxidized through chemical reactions, one molecule of glucose (CgH,,0¢)
is broken down into two molecules of pyruvic acid (C;H,O;). Four molecules of
ATP (two ATP being used in the process) and two molecules of NADH+H* are
produced in this stage. In this process, no oxygen is required. It is the initial
stage for both aerobic and anaerobic respiration. It takes place in the cytoplasm
ofa cell.

Stage-2: Acetyl Co-A formation

This stage also takes place in the cytoplasm. Each molecule of pyruvic acid,
produced in glycolysis, is transformed into a molecule of 2-carbon acetyl co-A,
a molecule of CO, and a molecule of NADH+H' (i.e. from two molecules of

pyruvic acid two molecules of acetyl Co-enzyme-A, two molecules of CO, and
two molecules of NADH+H+ are produced). Previously it is assumed that this

stage occurs in cytoplasm but the latest data show that the reaction occurs in the
matrix of mitochondria,

Stage-3: Kreb's cycle

In Kreb's cycle, 2-carbon acetyl Co-A, are oxidized to produce two molecules of
CO». This cycle is named after the British biochemist Sir Hans Kreb who
discovered the eycle. In this stage, acetyl Co-A enters the mitochondria and

2025
£23

participates in Kreb's eyele. All the reactions of this cyele occur in the
mitochondria. In this cycle, from one molecule of acetyl Co-A, two molecules of
carbon dioxide, three molecules of NADH+H"*, one molecule of FADH2 and one
molecule of GTP (Guanosine triphosphate) are produced. So, from two
molecules of acetyl Co-A, four molecules of CO,, six molecules of NADH+H*,
two molecules of FADH, and two molecules of GTP are produced. It is notable
that ATP can be produced directly instead of GTP in the Kreb’s cycle of animal
cell, But in almost all plants ATP is always produced instead of GTP. Since one
molecule of ATP is produced in next stage (i,e Electron Transport System) which
is equivalent of one molecule of GTP. That’s why this difference does not occur
any variation of total amount of energy derived from Kreb’s cycle.

Stage-4: Electron transport system

Tn this stage, NADH+H+ (reduced NAD), and FADH2 (reduced FAD) produced
in the above three stages are oxidized. Consequently ATP, water, electrons
containing high-energy and protons are produced. The energy is released while
electrons containing high-energy move through the electron transport system.
This energy is used in the formation of ATP. The electron transport system takes
place in the mitochondria,

co), Os
Acetyl Co-A be Acetyl CoA
Acetyl Co-A Acetyl ConA
aNADHs ‘WADE
siete | FADE.
an or
Kreb'’s cycle Kreb's cycle
2003

| CO: +watert+38 ATP +Heat energy |

Figure 4.06 Acrobic respiration process
In aerobic respiration, one molecule of glucose is completely oxidized to

produces six molecule of CO,, six molecules of water and 38 ATP. This is shown
in the chart below.

Stage of respiration | Substance produced Used substance | Neat product
Glycolysis 2 molecules pyruvic acid |
2 molecules NADH+H* 2 molecules ATP | 6 ATP
4 molecules ATP | 2 ATP
Acetyl Co-A 2molecules acetyl Co-A | 2 molecules 2 molecules CO,
2 molecules CO2 pyruvic acid 6 ATP
2 molecules NADH+H" |
Kreb’s Cycle 4 molecules COs 2 molecules | 4 molecules CO,
6 molecules NADH+H* acetyl Co-A 18 ATP
2 molecules FADH, 4 ATP
2 molecules GTP |2 ATP
| 38 ATP (net total ATP)
aca | +6 molecules CO;

| molecule NADH+H* or NADH, = 3 molecules ATP
1 molecule FADH?2 = 2 molecules ATP
1 molecule GTP = 1 molecule ATP

Stages of anaerobic respiration

Anaerobic respiration has two stages. The two stages are:

Stage -1: Incomplete oxidation of glucose

In this stage, from one molecule of glucose, two molecules of pyruvic acid, four
molecules of ATP{two of them already being used) and two molecules of
NADH+H" are produced. This process looks similar to glycolysis in aerobic
respiration. However, it is considered that the oxidation of glucose here is
incomplete because the pyruvic acid that is produced here is reduced in the next
stage.

Stage-2: Incomplete reduction of Pyruvic Acid

With the help of enzymes in the cytoplasm, pyruvic acid is reduced to CO, and
ethyl alcohol, or only lactic acid. In this case NAD (NADH+H+), which is
reduced in glycolysis, releases clectron, proton and energy after oxidization and
these are used to produce lactic acid and in some cases ethanol! from pyruvic
acid, On the other hand, oxidative phosphorylation does not take place because
of the absence of oxygen. So in anaerobic respiration, only two molecules of
ATP are produced from the glycolysis of glucose.

2025
2025

4.3.2 Factors affecting respiration

The factors affecting respiration are both external and internal.

(a) External factors: External factors affecting respiration are mentioned below:
T)Temperature: The rate of respiration becomes low at temperatures below
20°Celsius and above 45° Celsius. The optimum temperature for respiration is from
20° Celsius to 45°Celsius.

W)Oxygen: In aerobic respiration, pyruvic acid is oxidised into CO, and H,O.
50, aerobic respiration cannot be carried out withoul oxygen,

Ti) Water: The supply of optimum amount of water keeps in respiration its normal
state. If the supply of water is too litle or too much, respiration is inhibited.
TV)Light: Though light is not required for respiration, the rate of respiration is
higher in day light, because the exchange of CO, and O, through stomata Is easier
since the stomata is opened.

¥)Carbon dioxide: If the amount of CO, in the air is increased, the rate of
respiration becomes slower.

b) Internal factors: The internal factors are mentioned below:

I)Food materials: In respiration energy, water and CO, are produced by breaking
down food materials (respiratory substance), so the amount and types of food
control the rate of respiration.

IHEnzymes: Many types of enzymes actively take part in the process of
respiration. So, a deficiency of enzymes causes the rate of respiration to slow.
TiAge of cells: In young cells ( especially, cells in the meristematic tissue) the
greater amount of protoplasm causes respiration at a higher speed than in old cells.
TV)inorganic salts: Though some salts inhibit the process of respiration, some salts
in the cells are essential for the running of normal activities of the cell and to drive
the process of respiration.

V)Intracellular water: Water is necessary to dissolve different respiratory
substances and to increase the effect of enzymes.
ag!
Fe:

4.3.3 Significance of respiration
An organism performs all activities with the energy produced through

respiration. CO, released during respiration is used in the process of
photosynthesis to produce carbohydrate, the main food of living beings. This
process helps plants to absorb mineral salts, which indirectly drive the growth
and other physiological activities in a plant. The energy required for cell division
is produced through respiration. So, this process also controls the growth of
organisms. Different sub-alkaline or organic acids are also produced through
respiration and they help other physiological activities of life. Some bacteria
cannot live in the presence of oxygen. Their main source of energy is anaerobic
respiration. ‘Through the process, ethyl alcohol is produced, This process is also
used in industry. Through this process, lactic acid, through fermentation,
produces curd, cheese etc. It is also used in making bread, Yeast produces alcohol
and CO, gas through the process fermentation, CO, makes the bread inflamed.

@) Individual Activity

Activity : Experiment to demonstrate the release of energy in the form of
heat during respiration.

Essentials: Two thermoflasks, two thermometers, two rubber corks with holes,
some germinated chick-peas, 10% mercuric chloride solution.

Procedure: Label one of the
thermoflasks as A and the other as
B. Some germinatd chickpeas along
with some water are placed in
thermoflask A. A thermometer should
be inserted through the hole of a cork on
the 'flask A' with its opening sealed well.
The remaining chickpeas will be placed
in flask B afier soaking in 10% mereuric
chloride solution for 10 minutes.

Figure 4.07: Tharmoflask

2023
2025

A thermometer will also be inserted in thermoflask B. Now, after taking the
initial temperature of each thermometer 'A' and B', they should be kept at rest.
Observation: After a few hours the temperature of the thermoflask, containing
germinated seeds, marked 'A' rises. There is no temperature change in the other flask,

Conclusion: As the chick peas in the flask 'A' was fresh, it carried out respiration
and released of energy in the form of heat, the temperature in the flask rises. But,
in thermoflask 'B’, as the seeds are dead and sierilized because they were soaked
in mercuric chloride solution, the respiration process docs not occur. So, the
temperature remains unchanged,

Precautions
1. The seeds should be fresh and well germinated.
2. The tip of the thermometer should be positioned at the middle of the stacks of seeds.

(?)Exercise
Y questions:

otrtet

(72) swore >

What is photosynthesis? Represent it by a chemical equation.
What are the raw materials for photosynthesis?

What is respiration? Represent it by a chemical equation.

State the differences between photosynthesis and respiration,
State the differences between aerobic and anaerobic respiration,

| el

a ee

petnamth ene

1. Explain the dependence of organisms on photosynthesis.
2. Discuss the significance of respiration.
. Which one is evolved as a by-product in the process of photosynthesis?

a. Water b. Carbohydrates
c. Oxygen d. Carbon dioxide
. What number of ATP is produced in the glycolysis stage of respiration?
a. 4 b. 6
c.8 d. 18

Look at the stem and answer the questions no. 3 and 4.

3. The functions of both A and B are —

1. to intake Oj

ti. torelease H;O

iti, toremove CO

Which one of the following is correct?

ald u b. 1 & tit
c.U & iil di. ti & tii
. The process accomplished in the figure X-

i, keeps the environment cold

il. helps the process of photosynthesis
iii. inhibits the process of respiration

Which one of the following is correct?
ai & ii b.i & ii
ci & ii di, i & tii

2025
PP Ss

What is the chemical formula of pyruvic acid?
What do you understand by anaerobic respiration?

Explain how the component A of above figure is being produced.

What are the effects on plants if the production of A shown in the figure is
inhibited? Explain.

Bipasha, a student of class X, likes to eat carrots. As the carrots contain glucose, it
provides her with energy. Her younger sister asks her how a plant derives energy
for its growth. She replies that a plant also derives energy through the respiration.

What is photolysis of water?
What is meant by C, plants?

c. Explain with a chart how much energy is produced in Kreb’s cycle from two

molecules of food eaten by Bipasha.
What are the effects on plants if the process mentioned above is inhibited?

Forma-11, Biology Class-9-i0
