Chapter Eleven
Resources and Industries of Bangladesh

The economic and the social development of a country depend on resources and
industries. We use the essential products produced by the natural resources
directly or using the resources. The important resources of Bangladesh are
Agricultural and Forest resources, Mineral oil, Natural gas and Coal. The
importance of industries of this country is unlimited/anbounded as a developing
country. The garments sectors are contributing much in development of the economy

of Bangladesh.

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to—

explain the main agricultural products of Bangladesh and their distribution;
explain the importance of different forest regions/areas of Bangladesh:
create awareness of preserving the forest resources everywhere:

explain the position of Petroleum, Natural gas, Coal and Limestone displaying in
map;

explain the importance of Petroleum, Natural gas, Coal on the economy of
Bangladesh;

2025
2025

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 167

* explain/describe the main industries of Bangladesh and represent it in map;

* analyze the contribution of Garment Industries to the economy of
Bangladesh:

* explain the main tourist places of Bangladesh and display on map;

* explain the importance and prospect of Tourism Industry of Bangladesh;

« follow the duty of citizen in preserving the favourable environment of
tourism places as tourist.

Agricultural products

Agriculture plays an important role on the economy of Bangladesh. Profitable,
sustainable and environment friendly agricultural systems are important for the
development of a country. The contribution of total agricultural sectors in G.D.P in
the fiscal year of 2017-2018 is 14.10 percent (Source: Ministry of Agriculture of
Bangladesh Report, 2018). About 40.6 percent of total man power of this country
are engaged in agriculture. The main exporting products in agricultural sectors are
frozen food, raw jute, jute goods, tea etc.

Agricultural Crops of Bangladesh
|

¥ ¥

Food crops : Rice, wheat, lentil, potatoes. Cash crops : Jute, tea, sugarcane,
chick pea, vegetables, fruits. cotton, tobacco, flowers.
Food crops

Rice : Rice is the staple food crop of Bangladesh. Aus, Amian, Boro are the varieties
of rice cultivated in this country, Rice is produced in all the districts of Bangaldesh.
Rice is mostly cultivated in Rangpur, Cumilla, Sylhet, Jashore, Kishoreganj,
Rajshahi, Barishal, Mymensingh, Bogura, Dinajpur, Dhaka and Noakhali. But Aman
and Boro are produced more in Rangpur and Sylhet (fig. 11.1) respectively.

Rice grows well in the regions where) | Sandy soil is favourable condition
temperature ranges between 16° to 30°) | forrice cultivation. So.rice is grown
celsius and rainfall ranges between 100 to] | everywhere in Bangladesh.

200 centimetres.

The favourable condition of rice cultivation

168 Geography and Environment

Wheat : At present wheat cultivation is done in almost all the areas in Bangladesh
where rice is grown due to the demand of food crop. But the northern districts of
Bangladesh are more favourable for cultivating wheat, Wheat srowing areas are
Dinajpur, Rangpur, Pabna, Rajshahi, Kushtia. Jashore, Bogura (fig. 11.1).

a w ay ae de
é BANGLADESH
Le Sais INDIA PRODUCTION REGION »
a _ af (Asem)
x aE i tet is LEGEND
ae manta = ¥
th, ‘if Ve a a Wien =f
% aN at ‘4 1
z er Ps) INDIA
Fh" INDIA | e +e . $e! nies ca
(West Bengal) | ‘of intel" ene Site eee
F ile FT Share 1 a o*.

Je gop , ‘ona : Ce
ee: See, ee be } ‘Neuman, Sunmamigan) 307" 7
ttle SS Ag tee eg
baviettbey $2" or ey | Myrocchinen BP ee Seid /

Lass wy e gt! ck
LVS PX, Keates bag wrt ra es + ’
a ies nae foe INDIA a nw

r= 4 r a De * th
* S fred ghee eg come Cir) 74)
rst ea wae Lead ae * VS

Fig. 11.1; Rice and Wheat production regions of Bangladesh

The other important crops are oil-seeds like sesame. mustard, peanut, lentil, mungbean,
gram, garlic, potatoes. fruits and vegetables.

2025
Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 169

Wheat grows well in temperature ranging from | |The fertile loamy soil of
16° to 22° celsius and rainfall ranging from 50 | |Bangladesh is favourable [or
to 75 centimetres. Wheat is grown well during | |cultivating wheat.

rainless winter in Bangladesh through irrigation,

Ne

The favourable condition of wheat cultivation

Cash or commercial crops

The crops which are cultivated for direct selling is called Cash or Commercial crops.

Jute

Jute is the main cash crop of Bangladesh. There are two kinds of jute cultivated in
Bangladesh named, Deshi and Tosha, Fite is grown well in the districts of Rangpur,
Mymensingh, Faridpur, Cumilla, Jashore, Dhaka, Kushtia, Jamalpur, Tangail and Pabna

(fie. 11.2).

Jute grows in warm region. The temperature | | Sandy loam soil is suitable for
ranges from 20° to 35° celsius and needs jute cultivation.
plenty of rainfall from 150 to 250 centimetres.

we

The favourable condition of jute cultivation

Sugarcane

Sugarcane is an important crop for producing sugar and molasses (gurh). Plain
land is required to cultivate sugarcane. The main regions for cultivating sugarcane
are Rajshashi, Rangpur. Dinajpur, Pabna, Kushtia, Faridpur. Dhaka, Jashore.
Mymensingh etc. (fig. 11.2).

The temperature ranges from 19° to 30° Sugarcane grows well in light
celsius and the rainfall of at least 150) | dry soil preferably sandy silt.
centimetres is needed to cultivate sugarcane,

Se

The favourable condition for sugarcane cultivation

Forma-22, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
170 Geography and Environment

a a ae of ra
aN BANGLADESH
Le “346s wow PRODUCTION REGION _
Pact oe \¢ ‘L, LEGEND

Fig. 11.2: Jute, Sugarcane and Tea production regions of Bangladesh

Tea

Tea is one of the main cash crops in Bangladesh. Most of the produced tea of the
country is exported abroad. Tea is grown in well drained soils on the slopes of the
hills. Most of the tea gardens are in Moulvibazar, Habiganj, Sylhet. Besides

4
>
om
2025

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 171

these, there are tea gardens in Chattogram, Rangamati, Khagrachhari, Bandarban,
Thakurgaon and Panchagarh (fig. 11.2).

Warm and humid climate is required to Tea is grown well in fertile
cultivate tea. Temperatures from 16° to 17° loamy soil rich in iron and
celsius and rainfall of 250 centimetres. organic content.

Na

The favourable condition of tea cultivation

Except the natural indicators of agricultural crops, the imdicators named capital,
labour, transportation, market i.e also influence on extension and production.
The agricultural extension is possible combining with the government assistance and

natural environment.

Crop diversification

In Bangladesh, winter is good for the cultivation of cereals/vegetables. In this period,
cereal crops are cultivated in different areas, As a result, the farmers get less price. If
same kinds of crops are cultivated year alter year in the same soil, nutrition of soil
decreases. At the same time, cultivation of various types of crops helps the farmers to
get high price. Various parts of plants mixed with fertilizer increase the fertility of
the soil and check the soil degradation. As a result, much fertilizer is not required

to use, By this way the farmers, by cultivating various types of crops can benefit

themselves and the environment,

Forest of Bangladesh

The resources which are produced or available from the forest is known as forest
resources. Ideally 25 percent of total land area of a country should remain
under as cover to maintain environmental balance and the economic development.
But according to the statistics of Forest Department of Bangladesh 2017, the total
forest area until December 2017 is only about 17.4791 percent in Bangladesh at
present. The forests of Bangladesh are classified into three categories due to the

variation of soil and climate (fig. 11.3).
172

Geography and Environment
Ma ~ os Hr $
BANGLADESH
r FOREST AREA 4
bi 26°
LEGEND
Tropical Bvergroea und Decidious Fore
Tropical Docidlieus Fors! ar Sal Foret ee |
Mangrove Forest or Sanderben LrZ)
bas? INDIA "TY
(Wes Bengal’
Cm
/
Hi *
f .
aa” Y.
Ss
Pie,
\
a
I
Ls Ree
INDIA. “—~,
(West Bengal)
} 22°
i‘ 4
L < 4;
Bet?
a BAY OF BENGAL
0 xX 64 Keloertees,
a" a a a”

Fig. 11.3: Forest area of Bangladesh

2025
2025

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh

173

Tropical Evergreen and Deciduous
forest : These forests cover the
major parts of Khagrachhari,
Rangamati, and Bandarban and a
considerable part of Chattogram and
Sylhet region. Evergreen trees have
widespread coverage in the hills due

to heavy rainfall,

Tropical Deciduous forest : The tropical
deciduous forest is found in less rainfall
areas in the Pleistocene terraces of
Bangladesh. This forest region is divided
into two parts. (a) Forest of Mymensingh,
Madhupur and Bhawal Garh of Tangail
and Gazipur. (b) The forest cover of
Barind region found in Dinajpur and
Rangpur District. The leaves of deciduous
forest fall during winter and new leaves
again sprout during summer.

Oa i

The forest of Bangladesh

|

Mangrove forest or the Sundarban : This forest covers the districts of Khulna,
Satkhira, and Bagerhat in the north, Bay of Bengal in the south, Haringhata river,
Pirojpur and Barishal district in the east and Raimangal and Hariabhanga river which
partially form the boundary with West Bengal, India. This forest occupies 6,000
square kilometres of area in Khulna division. This region is enriched with the trees
because of tides from the sea and salty water and heavy ramfall.

Task : The characteristics of different plants and names are given. Write the names
of the relevant forest on the right hand column.

Plants and Nature

The name of forest

1. Sundari, Garan, Gewa, Dhundal, Keora and

Golpata are usually grown in the tidal
confluence of sweet and salty water.

Sal, Gajari, Koroi, Hizal shed their leaves
annually,

Chapalish, Moyna, Telsur and Bamboo never

shed their leaves any time.

Importance of forest : Forests play an important role on the economy of the
couniry. The forest resources of Bangladesh are limited and it is diminishing day by
day. The importance of forest is unlimited to keep the balance of natural

environment and the economic development.
174 Geography and Environment

1. Natural importance : The forest plays a significant role in saving
biodiversity, reducing land degradation, decreasing landslides, increasing the amount
of rainfall, keeping the humid weather and in controlling the flood,

2. Prospect of Tourism industry : Sundarban and Chattogram Hill Tracts are the
probable places of tourism industry. The diversity of these places can attract the
tourists which can contribute to the economy of the country.

3. Collection of consumable goods : To meet the daily needs of the people, they
collect wood, bamboo, cane, honey, wax etc. from the forest. The animal hide and
skins and the medicinal herbs are also collected from the forest.

4, Construction material ; The people collect wood, bamboo, cane etc. from the
forest so that they can construct their houses and make furniture,

5. Development of Industry : The forest resources are used for the production of
paper, rayon, match, fiber board and the accessories for toys. They have thus
accelerated the development of industries. The Karnaphuli Paper Mill and the
Newsprint Mill of Khulna have been established on the availability of forest
resources.

6. Disaster risks minimisation: The forests of coasial region play an important
role in reducing the destruction from tidal waves during hurricane or storms.

7. Transport and communication system : The wood collected from the forest is
used to make railway slippers, boats, launches, ships, electricity poles, bridges etc.

8. Source of government revenue : The forest resource is a source of government
revenue. For example the government increases its revenue by selling and by
imposing taxes on such resources,

9. The development of agriculture : Forests keep the climate humid as a result it
causes heavy rainfall which helps to develop agriculture.

10. Foreign currency earnings : Bangladesh earns a huge amount of foreign
currency by exporting the hide and skins of animals, tooth, horns, feather of different
types of animals.

Petroleum, natural gas, coal and hard rock of Bangladesh

Petroleum, natural gas. coal and hard rock are important mineral resources
(fig. 11.4), The economic development is possible if a coordination of research,
production and distribution is done,

2025
2025

Resources and Industnes of Bangladesh

ga” 89” 90° gi” 92°
p BANGLADESH
ve “YX, now ~—- MINERAL RESOURCES
; v LEGEND
‘, Coal Pa)
Mineral Ok
Natural Gas yf
Hard Rock 25
ee er oan
yp
As ar Cat
Kailanttiiag”
Fench 24"
J af Anapibazar
suing
i a
“a a ist INDIA
ST if (Tripura)
s donb ey a
i % } 4
,f 5 rN
INDIA . \ ne § O35
(West Bengal) Gi, Begumgan) aN ey a i ited
ae df geen “\ 1.
7 N 5 mh, cet ne \ -
pez \ >. , Semutamg, 2 \ _ 22
\ te 5 \ 7 7 ing} \
" 1] 7 | 9
ay On d/ Sangueme i
4 ; i \ ae
Layq® aa Kuluibio I 4 ay"
Ie i "A ae |
t j hi
BAY OF BENGAL i= ‘Ay
ti] u 84 Kulomertress \ %,
as” ag" a9” oy" Vag _®

Fig. 11.4: Mineral resources of Bengladesh

175

Petroleum : The experts think that there is petroleum im the coastal regions of
Bangladesh. Oil was found in the seventh well of natural gas in Haripur of
Sylhet district in 1986, Everyday around 600 barrels of crude oil from this well is
extracted. This crude oil is sent to Chattogram refinery for processing.
176 Geography and Environment

Apart from petrol, kerosene, bitumen etc. are produced as by product from this crude
oil. The second oil field of Bangladesh is located at Bramchal of Moulvibazar district.
Around 1,200 barrels of oil produced everyday from this field.

Natural gas : Natural gas is an important fuel resource in Bangladesh. [t meets
about 71 percent commercial consumption of the country. The total number of
gas fields so far discovered is 26. These gas fields have approximately 27.81 trillion
cft gas for extaction. From 1960 to June, 2018, 15.94 trillion cfi gas has been extracted
and 11,92 trillion ctf gas was left to be extrated. Al present gas is being tapped from
112 wells of 21 gas fields. In the year of 2017-2018 extracted 968.7 billion eft gas.
(Source ; Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2019).

Gas Fields
On production Production not| Production | New gas field

yet started | postponed discovered

Bakhrabad, Habiganj, Sylhet,| Begumganj, Chhatak, Bhola

Kailashtila, Rashidpur, Titas, Kutubdia. Kamila,

Narsingdi, Meghna, Saldanadi, Sangu,

Jalalabad, Beanibazar, Fenchuganj, Feni.

Moulvibazar, Bibryana, Bangura,

Shahbajpur, Semutang. Shrikail,

Sundalpur,

Coal : Coal is one of the sourcees of energy. It is used to mun the machineries,
railways and ships ete. Coal is also used as fuel. Bangladesh is not rich in coal
resources. The expected deposit of five coal fields discovered in the south-westerm
part of the country is 7.962 million tons. Until December 2018, 10.40 million metric tons
coal have been extracted from the coal fields, Around 3,000 metric tons of coal are being
tapped everyday from the coal field of Barapukuria of Dinajpur district. There are
also coal fields of Khalashpeer at Rangpur, Fulbari and Dighipara of Dinajpur
and at Jamalganj of Bogura (Source: Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2019)

A good amount of low grade peat coal is found in Banghi and Chanda Beel of
Faridpur, Kola Beel of Khulna, Brahmanbaria, Rishoregan] and a few places of
Sylhet. Besides a reserve of high quality coal of bituminous and lignite variety
has been found in Rajshahi, Bogura, Naogaon and Sylhet. A high quality lignite
coal is being tapped out from the Barapukuria coal field of Dinajpur.

2025
Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 177

Hard rock: Hard rock is used in the construction of railways. roads, houses,
bridges and in flood embankments. Hard rock is available In Rantpukur and
Shyampur of Rangpur district and Madhyapara of Dinajpur district, Arrangement
has been made to extract hard rocks in Ranipukur of Rangpur district with foreign
assistance. Experts think ‘Around 17 lakhoftons hard rock can be extracted every
year from this field of rocks.’ The quantity of extracted rocks of different size al
2017-2018 fiscal year was 7 lakh 59 thousand 634.25 metric tons of hard rocks from
Madhyapara of Dinajpur district. (Source: Bangladesh Economic Survey. 2018).

The importance of petroleum, natural gas and coal on the economy of
Bangladesh

Petroleum is an essential product in this moder civilization. It Electricity.
energy and heat. Gasoline, diesel, gas, kerosene, lubricant, parafin etc. are the by
products of refining petroleum. Petrol and diesel are used to run the railways,

vehicles. ships and aeroplanes. Foreign currency can be saved if the available
amount of oil is extracted from the gas fields. At the same time the dependence on
natural gas could be reduced,

Natural gas is used in mills and factories as raw materials, The natural gas of Haripur
is used in the fertilizer factories of Fenchuganj and in cement factory of Chhatak.
Natural gas of ‘Titas is used in the fertilizer factory of Ghorashal as raw material.
Natural gas is also used to make pesticide, rubber, plastic and artificial fibre. The tea
gardens depend on the natural gas of Rashidpur. The natural gas is used in lieu
of farness oil in some electric plant of Brahmanbaria. Such as the Titas gas is
used to produce the thermal electric plant of Siddhirganj, Ashuganj, and
Ghorashal. The natural gas is also used for domestic and commercial purposes.

Task : Fill up the table below (individual work).

Industry ~ The name of used gas field
Fenchuganj fertilizer factory
Chhatak cement factory
Ghorashal fertilizer factory
Siddhirganj thermal electric plant
Ashuganj thermal electric plant

Forma-23, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
178 Geography and Environment

Coal can be used as fuel alternative to gas and firewood. At present around 65
percent extracted coal from Barapukuria is being used for the production of electricity
at the thermal power plant of Barapukuria. The other 35 percent coal is being used in
the brick-field, mills and factories along with other sectors. Coal is playing a
significant role in saving the forest resources. The environmental pollution which is
caused by burning wood and coal does not cause that pollution. Coal helps to
protect the natural environment by protecting the forest resources. These mineral
resources play a great role in developing the agriculture reducing the foreign

exchange spending, government source of earming and creating the employment
opportunities etc. We should be aware and careful of using these resources. We

will not waste these valuable resources,

Major industries of Bangladesh

Industrialization is the precondition of the economic and social development of a
country. The industrial sector can play a significant role in developing the
socio-economic development and in reducing the poverty. The contribution of
industries is increasing on domestic production day by day, According to
Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2019 in the year 2018-2019 the contribution of
industries in GDP is 35.14 percent. The main industries of Bangladesh are :

Jute industry

Jute industry is one of the main agro based industries, There are skilled and cheap
labour for jute industry in this country. Above all, the assistance and cooperation of
the government for jute indusiry is offered. In the private sector, many jute mills
have been established. Total number of jute mills are 205 and the annual production
is 6,63,000 metric tons. Table below shows the jute industries, its products and the
exporting countries.

Regions of Jute industries | Jute manufactured) Exported countries
products

Narayanganj, Khulna, Chattogram, | Hessian, gunny | USA, UR, India, Egypt,
Demra, Ghorashal, Narsingdi,| bags, carpet. ropes,/Russia, Poland,

Bhairab Bazar, Gourtpur, | sandals, mats, dolls, | Bulgaria. Belgium,
Madaripur, Chandpur, Sirajganj, | show pieces, juton. / Canada, Tialy,Germany,
Habiganj. Japan, France.

2025
2025

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 179

Cotton textile industry

The second major industry is the cotton textile industry. Cloth is next to food
among the basic needs. So, the cotton textile industry has great importance.
Bangladesh is not self-sufficient in cotton textile industry. The climate required
for cotton textile industry is favourable. The cotton textile industries of Bangladesh

are located in some regions. Such as :

Dhaka region Chattogram | Cumilla and Rajshahi and
region Noakhali Khulna region
region

Mirerbagh, Postagola, Faujdarhat, | Durgapur, Rajshahi, Bogura,
Shyampur, Demra, Savar of | North Daulatpur, Sirajganj and
Dhaka district; Kaitoli, Halimanagore, | Pabna less of Rajshahi
Narayanganj, Murapara, Sholoshahar, | Arigola, division : Dinajpur
Kachpur, Dhamgarh., Pachlayish, | Brahmanbaria | of Rangpur
Laxmankhola, Fatulla of Jublee road, | and division and
Natayangany district; Halishahar, | Banchharampur; | Kushta, Magura,
Tongi, Joydebpur, Kaliganj | Kalurghat. | Feni and Raipur | Noapara of Jashore
of Gazipur district; of Noakhali district of Khulna
Narsingdi, Madhabdi, region. division.
Baburhat and Ghorashal of
Natsingdi district.

The cotton textile industries of Bangladesh are run by imported cotton and thread
from abroad. In Bangladesh a huge quantity of cotton, textiles and yarns are imported
from Japan, Singapore. Hong Kong, Korea, India and Pakistan every year.

Paper industry

Paper industry is one of the largest industries of Bangladesh. The first paper
mill was established at Chandraghona in 1953. At present there are six government
paper mills, four board mills and one newsprint paper mill in Bangladesh (fig. 11.5),
180

Geography and Environment

Paper mills

Produced
paper

Production raw
materials

Karnaphuli paper mull at Chandraghona, the
North Bengal paper mill at Pakshi in Pabna,
Sylhet pulp and paper mill at Chhatak.
Bashundhara paper mill, Magura and Shahjalal
paper mills in Narayanganj, Newsprint paper
mill in Khulna, Bangladesh Hard board mills.
Adamjee particle board mills, Kaptat and Tongi
board mills.

Bamboo, soltwood, | Writing paper,
reeds,

sugarcane printing paper.

wastage, jute sticks packing and
and raw jute. other papers
and newsprint.

Fertilizer Industry

Bangladesh is an agricultural country. The additional food is needed to meet the

demand of food of increasing population. For

this we need fertilizer. The first

= ag" ey ar a”
BANGLADESH
wot INA, MAIN INDUSTRIES 28"

a i
ra + ann

LeGENe
F
~ bY Ate ineiry oe Paper industry .
we ‘ Cotton industry « Fostiiner industry»
“4 Denpur ‘e-i)

La.

Sy Maree beast |

a ey oo” ut na" %

Fig, 11.5 : Main industries of Bangladesh

fertilizer industry was

established at Fenchuganj in

Sylhet district im 1951.
Fertilizer is being produced
from seventeen fertilizer

factories. Among them the
main fertilizer factories are
Ghorashal Fertilizer Factory,

Ashuganj Fertilizer Factory.

| Plash Urea Fertilizer Factory,

Triple Supper Phosphate

| Fertilizer Factory Chattogram,

Urea Fertilizer Factory,
Jumuna Fertilizer Factory and
Fenchuganj Ammonium
Sulphate Fertilizer Factory
(fig. 11.5).

Fertilizer Indusiry one of the
largest industries of
Bangladesh. We have a great
opportunity to produce huge
amount of fertilizer due to

= * 25"
INEM sn /  NCWA
View! Benoa ‘y L... leghainya)
= gg ie i ogee,
oa b=:
‘ a mes,
% Bogue _ oe Pyle De -_
7 ‘ ; i ‘
ten Cangas » *
™, * Ser) . haga P,
=, a® ‘ aes 8 , fig
L
- Pare oP aif
Kune" ’ et TT) Cone
Pie Ba oie featurgr amin a
At anes
33" f ™ or 4 INDIA pL 3F
‘ Cumiia, (Tomas |
es a |
inca P ory change | < \
ent Barger ip daghon pieeiipas . iA it T INDIA
\* Bacihal_. boktespur eo” enero
\ ‘
w duenfer AE ett cer Sar!
‘om 7, Ee }
a ‘a Aasgamnady
.
‘, Chonaraflors |
i c
¢ \
ar . pay
BAY OF BENGAL Pa.
‘2
0 Be fl Kinnene 4 =
Ls
4

2025
2025

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 181

the availability of natural gas. Bangladesh will be able to export fertilizer
aller meeting the country’s demand within a few years.

Contribution of garment industries to the economy of Bangladesh

The garment industries of Bangladesh have been developed as an important industry.
Export oriented garments industries started to flourish during the later part of
seventies and during early cighties. Afterwards this industry placed itself at the
top most exporting sector of Bangladesh very rapidly. A number of garments
industries are there in Bangladesh. Among them 75 percent garments industries are
located in Dhaka region. Rest of them are located in Chittagong port city and a few
in Khulna. During 2017-2018* fiscal year Bangladesh earned 15,426 Million US dollars
which accounts for 42.07 percent of total foreign currency earnings (Source :
Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2018* provisional).

Produced garment Exported countries

Trouser, jeans pant, skirt, tops, sweater, USA, Germany, France, Italy,
jacket, pullover, cardigan, blouse, T-shirt. | Netherlands, Canada, Belgium, Spain,
shirt and pant. and UK.

A favourable environment excites for development of the ready-made industries
in Bangladesh. The availability of manpower at a low salary is one of the major
factors. The garment industry is known as ‘Billion dollar’ industry,

EP? : Export Processimg Zone.

Tourism industry of Bangladesh

Bangladesh is a colourful country having different seasons in nature. The natural
beauties of sea-beaches, the depth of forest, hilly areas naturally existed here for
tourism. Tourist attraction sites of Bangladesh make up the prospective sectors of
development where the longest sandy sea-beach, mangrove forest, coral island, lake,
Tiver and the beautiful sceneries and the boat light fill the mind with delight. The
hilhy land surrounded by evergreen forest is also very attractive. Buddha Vihara and
182 Geography and Environment

moundswhich are the ruins of ancient civilization are also places of interest. There
are beautiful and attractive natural places like Haor or wetlands, Tea gardens of
Sylhet, and the scenery of sun rising and setting of Kuakata beach. Apart from these
there are many historical, archeological and many Bangalee cultural sites which can
attract local and international tourists to visit those places.

Importance of tourism industry of Bangladesh

Tourism industry is an important industry in the modern world. By developing this
industry, it can contribute greatly to the economic development of the country,
social stability and regional development.It can contribute to enhance the relationship
with other countries and provide impetus for environmental development. The tourism

industry can be considered the best for displaying the social and cultural heritage of
Bangladesh to the people of the world.

The national industrial policy of 2005 acknowledged tourism as an industry in
Bangladesh and gave priority to develop this sector. Increased employment
opportunity and national revenue can be achieved through tourism industry. The
beauties of Bangladesh can be presented to the other people taising the tourism
industry. Bangladesh still stays at a primary stage in such a risk less industry. The total
nuniber of tourists who came from the other countries to Bangladesh both in 2018 were

around 2.92,882. Bangladesh has earned around 1056.74 US Dollar in 2018 from the
tourists (Source : Bangladesh Tourism Ministry, Annual Report, 2018-2019).

Importance of tourism centres of Bangladesh

Bangladesh is naturally beautiful, archeologically and historically enriched country.
So, every place of Bangladesh has the attractive elements for tourism. The name of

regional important tourism places of Bangladesh are mentioned here (fig. 11.6).

2025
Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 183

88° ag” 30° gt" 92°
ra BANGLADESH
tis a INDIA TOURIST MAP
35° _ Pancha 1 (Assam) | LEGEND
-~ Ve : é " ‘scion Ro Notoncatvres ft
F) Sh a Museum Pickeus Spot

BAY OF BENGAL =
wrod %
a B Metre ae

88° 89” 90° 91

Fig. 11.6: Tourism map of Bangladesh

Tourist Places of grea er Dhaka: Historically Dhaka is both the capital and main city
of Bangladesh. It is known as the city of mosques, The Satgambuj mosque was built
in the 17th centaury, Tara mosque in the [8th century and Bartul Mukarram Mosque

4
=|
oy
184 Geography and Environment

was built very recently. They are famous example of tourism places. Dhakeshwari
Temple was built in the Ilth century. Lalbagh fort was built by the Mughal
Emperors on the banks of river Buriganga. Bahadurshah park was built in 1857 as a
mark of respect to the last Emperor of Mughal dynasty. There are other places
like Ahsan manjil, Carzon hall, Dhaka university, Memorial of National Poet, National
Museum. Mirpur Intellectual Graveyard, Central Shahid Minar. Martyr Memorial of
Rayerbazar and the museum of the father of the Nation Bangabandhu at Dhamnondi.
Sohrawardy uddan where Bangabandhu delivered the historical proclamation on 7th
March during the great liberation war in 1971 ete. attracts the tourists specially.
Bhawal Garh and Jamindar Bari of Gazipur, the historic Sonargaon and Panam Nagar

of Narayangan}

Tourist Places of the eastern Bengal: Atia Mosque of Tangail, Grave and
Memorial of Politician Maulana Bhasani in Tangail. Bangabandhu Bridges, Madhupur
Tract, Darirampur, Mymensingh, a memorial place bearing the memory of national
poet Kazi Nazrul Islam. Mazar of Hazrat Shahjalal (R) and Hazrat Shahparan
(R), Keene Bridge, Jainta bill at Jaflong, Eco park at Lauachhara, Madhubkunda
waterfall of Moulvibazar etc. Buddist monastery and Shalban Vihara at
Mynamati, War cemetary for the Soldiers of second world war im Cumilla.
Bajrashahi mosque, Gandhi Ashram, Hatiya and Nijhum island of Noakhali are the
tourism places in Eastern Bengal.

Tourist Places of the northern Bengal: Borendra museum and Mazar of Shah
Makhdum (R) of Rajshahi, Sona mosque at Shibganj of Chapainawabganj, House of
Rani Bhobani and Rajbari at Dhighapatia (Uttara Gono-bhabon). Buddha Vihara
at Paharpur in Naogaon, Mahasthangarh in Bogura and the Mazar of Shah Sultan
Bolkhi, Kantajee temple of Dinajpur are the tourism places in Northern Bengal.

Tourist Places of the southern Bengal : Memorial and grave of the father of
Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibar Rahman at Tungipara, Gopalganj, Mazar of
Lalonshah and Kuthibari at Shilaydaha, birth place of poet Michael Madhusudhan
Datta at Sagoredari in Jashore, ‘Shishu Sargo and Art Gallen’ on the bank of Chitra
river of painter $.M Sultan in Narail, the Memorial at Mujibnagar in Meherpur,
Shat Gambuj Mosque al Bagerhat, Sea-beach at Kuakata in Patuakhali, the natural
Mangrove forest Sundarban located in greater Khulna, are the tourism places of
Northern Bengal.

2025
Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 185

Tourist Places of Chattogram Hill Tracts: The Kaptai lake is the main attraction
here (fig. 11.7). The natural beauties surrounded by greenery of hills. deep black
water of the lake is a source of unlimited enjoyment. Buddha Vihara and the house of
Chakma King are the tourist sites. People also enjoy the forest, hills and the natural
water flow of Khagrachhari. There are many attractive tourist places in Bandarban
named Mechla, Nilgiri, Shailopropat and Nilachal (fig. 11.8).

Fig. 11.8 : Nilachal

Tourist Places of Chattogram: The attractive tourism place of Chattogram are

Patenga sea-beach, Mazar of Hazrat Shah Amanat (R), Foy’s lake. DC Hill. Court
building and Hills of Sitalkunda.

Forma-24, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
186 Geography and Environment

Tourist Places of Cox’s Bazar : The world’s longest sea-beach and charming
scenery of Cox’s Bazar are the attractive tourism sites.

There are hills sloping down to the waters of the Bay of Bengal. Some important
tourist places of Cox*s Bazar are Himehhari, Inani beach, Kolatoli beach,
Buddhist templels of Cox’s Bazar and Ramu, Moheskhali island, Saint martin’s island
(fig. 11.9) ete.

Fig. 11.9 : Saint martin's island

Exercise
Multiple choice questions

lL. In which region of Bangladesh wheat cultivation has increased?
a. Eastern region b. Western region
c. Southern region d. Northern region
2. What type of soil is good for cultivation of sugarcane?
1. Sandy soil
ii. Muddy soil
ii, Mixed soil with organic material
Which one of the following is correct?
a. land ii b. iand ili

ce. nandi do i,nandin

2025
2025

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 187

Observe the map below and answer the question number 3 and 4:

r-) ar: ] a: -)

ag 90 91 $2

BANGLADESH 26° -
0

21°

3. What types of forests haye developed in “T’ area?
a. Tropical evergreen b, Tropical deciduous
c. Mangrove d. Tropical evergreen and deciduous
188

4.

Geography and Environment

What types of Trees are found above mentioned forest?

i. Chapalish
ii, Sal
lii. Hizal

Which one of the following is correct?
a. iand il b. iand itt

ce. ii and iti d. i, ii and iti

Creative questions

1.

o oi a é it)

68 69 90 i) a2

BANGLADESH

2a"

zt

a. Write down the name of the district where the second longest field is located,
b. Discuss the appropiate climate for wheat cultivation.
c. Describe the reason of production of important crop of “X° areas?

d. The main mineral resources extracted from *X* and ‘Y* areas and write
about the economical importance between “X* and “Y".

2025
2025

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 189

2. The home of Sima is situated in the North-western part of Bangladesh, An
industry has been developed there whose raw materials are imported from abroad.
On the other hand, the home of Poly is situated in the North-eastern part of
Bangladesh where a industry has been developed to play an important role in
increasing the food production.

a. What is industry?
b. Explain the reasons of developing the Jute industry in Bangladesh.

c. Explain the reasons of developing the industry which has been developed
in the areas of Sima.

d. What is your opinion about the possibility of Poly's indusiry?
