2025

Chapter Two
The Universe and Our Earth

The earth is our habitat. It is surrounded by the universe.The sun is at the centre of the
solar system. There are many other stars in the space. Moreover, the Moon (satellite).
the Earth (planet), comets, meteors and nebulaes are there in the space.The universe

is made up of small particles, and insects on earth. distant seen and unseen stars. In this
chapter, we will discuss space, universe, solar system, earth ete.

The universe

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to—

* describe the location and characteristics of the solar system, earth and other
planets and satellites;

* describe the nature and diameter of earth and satellite:

* explain the importance of lines of latitude and longitude;

® identify different places using latitude and longitude;

*® explain rotation and revolution:

* analyze the cause of day and might, its increase and decrease and its impact;
* cause of season change and its impact;

* make the model of solar system using different materials;

* have more interest to know about our only place of habitat, earth.
8 Geography and Environment

Space and Universe

The sky we see above us is limitless. This is called space Our Earth, Sun, Moon
and innumerable stars, plantes and sattelities are the parts of this sky. They move around
the space their own axis at a certain motion. Among them some have light of their
own and some don't have. At present Sun, Moon, planets, stars, comets, meteors,
nebulaes, pulsars. black dwarfs, black holes etc. are called extra terrestrial body.
Nobody knows how big the universe is. Nobody knows the nature and form of this
universe, Many scientists believe that the universe has no beginning and ending.
Some still believe that the universe has form and diameter. Scientists are discovering
new things about the Universe everyday but most of the things are still unknown.
Stars

The terrestrial body which has light of its own is called Star. There are innumerable
stars in the Universe (fig. 2.1). We can see some of them with our naked eyes. Some
of them can be seen from the Earth only through powerful telescopes. The stars are
burning gasballs, made of hydrogen and helium gases. These gases are burning at
a very high temperature (6000 Celsius). Other stars are not seen at day time due to the

soocching ight of the gun. Tt seems that all the stars are

lying on the same level when
seen from the earth. Actually,
they are lying al different
distances from the earth. The
distances between the earth
and stars are so great that it
cannot be measured by
kilometres. These are
measured by light years.
The distance covered in one
year is called one light year.
Light passes about three lakh
kilometres per second. Ii
takes 8 minutes 19 seconds to
reach the earth.The closest star
Fig. 2.1 ; Location of stars in the sky to the Sun is Proxima Centauri.
Tis distance from the Earth is
about 4.2 light years.

2025
The Universe and Our Earth 9

Constellation : At night some stars are seen in groups.These groups of stars
are called Constellation. Astrologers of ancient time gave them different names
based on their appearance, some of them look like bear or hunter.
Therefore they are named as Great Bear, Orion, Cassiopea, Little Bear, Canis

Major ete,

Galaxy: Planet, stars, dust, comets, vapours together make a galaxy or star world.
There are one hundred billion galaxies in the space (fig. 2.2).They are of different sizes
and forms, but most of them are snakelike or parabolic. Snakelike galaxies are large
in size and parabolic galaxies are very bright. They move at great distance from
each other. A small part of the galaxy is called Milky Way.

Fig. 2.2: Galaxy

Nebulae ; A nebulae is an interstellar cloud in outer space that is made up of dust,
hydrogen and helium gases, and plasma. It is formed when portions of the interstellar
medium collapse and clump together due to the gravitational attraction of the particles
that comprise them.

Milky way : The Milley Way is a spiral galaxy with a concentration of stars at its
centre. This gives the galaxy a central bulge from which arms of stars radiate out. We
live in one of these arms. Like all galaxies. the Milky Way is moving. Not only is the
whole galaxy travelling through space, but also the stars within it are continuously
moving around the galactic centre. Our solar system remains in such a Milky Way.

Meteor : A meteor is a meteoroid or a particle broken off an asteroid or comet
orbiting the Sun that burns up as it enters the Earth’s atmosphere, creating the effect
of a ‘shooting star’. Meteoroids that reach the Earth's surface without disintegrating are

Forma-2, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10)
10 Geography and Environment

called Meteorites (fig. 2.3).

Fig, 2.3 : Meteor

Comet : Comets are often referred to as ‘dirty snowballs’. They contain billions of icy
lumps.When the gravity from a large passing body like a star,becomes strong enough,
some large chunks of ice get pulled away from the cloud and head toward the Sun
(fig. 2.4).As that ball of ice gets close enough to the Sun,its heat begins to melt some
of the ice that makes upthe comet.The melted ice becomes a gaseous tail that extends
away from the source of the heat i-e. the Sun. English scientist Halley calculated the
comets orbit around the sun which brings it closer to the Earth every 76 years. So it
is named after him. Halley’s comet has been seen regularly since 240 BC and last
came in 1986,

Fig. 2.4: Comet

2025
2025

The Universe and Our Earth 11

Planet : A planet is a celestial body orbiting a star or stellar remnant thal is massive
enough to be rounded by its own gravity. Unlike stars, planets do not give off light.
They shine at night because they reflect light from the Sun. The planets and other

objects which orbit the Sun travel in flattened circles called Ellipses. In the solar
system there are eight planets, namely Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus and Neptune.

Satellite : A satellite is an object that goes around, or orbits, a planet.While there are
natural satellites. like the Moon, hundreds of man-made satellites also orbit the Earth.
The man-made satellites which are moving around the earth are used for weather

forecasting, information technology, telecommunication, detection of mineral
resources etc.

Solar system

Solar system consists of planets, asteroids satellites, in numerable comets and meteors.
The sun lies at the centre of solar system. The Earth is one of eight planets which orbit
the Sun, and these planets and their moons make up the solar system (fig. 2.5).The
word solar means ‘of the Sun'. The solar system also contains thousands of minor
planets, called Asteroids, and countless comets. The planets, asteroids and comets are
all held in their orbits by the Sun's gravity or Pulling force.

Fig. 2.5 : Solar system
Sun: The sun ts a star. It isa middle sized yellow coloured star. The original
source of heat and light of earth,other planets and their satellites is the sun.
12 Geography and Environment

Its diameter is approximately 13 lakh and 84 thousand kilometres and mass is
1.99 x 1015 Kilogram, Eight planets are moving round the Sun. They can be
listed from the nearest to the furthest as follows: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. The largest planet is Jupiter and the
smallest one is Venus. Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn are quite
bright and can be seen without any instrument from the earth. Uranus and
Neptune are less bright and they cannot be seen without telescope.

Mercury : Mercury is the smallest and nearest planet of the sun. The average
distance from the sun is 5.8 crore kilometres and its diameter is 4,850
kilometres. As it is closest to the Sun intense light sometimes makes it invisible.
Tt takes 88 days to move around the sun and so, 88 days make one year in
Mercury, Its gravitational power is so weak that it cannot retain in the
atmosphere. There are no air, water, rain or clouds. So there is no existence of
life. The surface of the mercury looked like that of the moon according to
sending photos of American Mariner-10 in 1974, Mercury has no satellite.

Venus : You must have heard about the morning star or the evening star and might
have seen ittoo. Venus in fact, is not a star. It glows in the sky like a star which
prompts us to call it a star.Venus is covered with dark cloud. So,the sun can never
be seen from ils surface, Cloudy atmosphere mainly consists of carbon dioxide. It is
the brightest and hottest planet of the solar system. [he distance between venus and
sun is 10.8 crore kilometres. No significant difference of light between day and night
is seen. It rains here but it is acid Rain. Its diameter is 12,104 kilometres. It takes 225
days to move around the sun. So, its year is of 225 days. It doesn’t have any satellite.
Though all plancts move around on their own axis from weal to east, venus moves
from east to west.

Earth : Earth is our habitat. It is the third nearest planet from the sun. The average
distance from the sun is 15 crore kilometres, and the diameter is nearly 12,667
kilometres. Earth takes 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes and 47 seconds to orbit the Sun.
Moon is the only satellite of the earth. Earth is the only planet where the atmosphere
contains oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide in proper amount for the plants and
animals to survive. Earth is the only planet in the solar system where life exists.

Mars :Mars is the nearest neighbour of earth. Average distance from the sun is 22.8
crore lalometres and the diameter is 6,787 lalometres. Length of day and mght is
equal, It takes 687 days to orbit the Sun. In this planet there is scarcity of water and
the amount of carbon dioxide in the air is very high which is the cause of no life on
Mars. Mars has two satellites. One of them is Phobos and the other is Detmos.

2025
2025

The Universe and Our Earth 13

Jupiter : Jupiter is the largest planet of the solar system. Its diameter is 142.800
kilometres. It is 1,300 times larger than the Earth. It is 77.8 crore kilometres away from
the Sun. Jupiter's atmosphere is made up of hydrogen and helium. It takes 4,331 days
to orbit the Sun. Jupiter has 79 satellites.

Saturn : Saturn is the second largest planet of the solar system. Its distance from the
Sun is 143 crore kilometres and the diameter is 1.20,000 kilometres. Atmosphere
contains a mixture of hydrogen and helium gas, methane and amonia, It takes 29,5
years to orbit the sun once. Saturn has the brightest rings and 82 satellites.

Uranus : Uranus is the third largest planet of the solar system. This planet is 287
crore kilometres away from the Sun. It takes 84 years to orbit the sun once. Diameter
of the Uranus is 49,000 kilometres. Methane gas is very high in the atmosphere. It
has rines around it but not bright like the Saturn. Uranus has 27 satellites.

Neptune : Its distance from the Sun is about 430 crore kilometres. Light and heat of
the sun is less. Its diameter is 48.400 kilometres. Its area is as large as 72 Earths and

the atmosphere is made up of Methane and Amonia. Neptune has 14 satellites. Neptune
circummnavigates once around the sun in 165 years.

Task : Table below will be filled by the students in groups within 15 minutes.
Position of Average | Time Number of Characteristics
planets in terms) distance | ken to satellites
of the distance | from around thé Structure Others
fromthesun | thesun | sun once =

Mercury z
Venus — Le
Earth i
Mars Mi
Jupiter 12:
Saturn :
Uranus ‘
Naptune z
Size and Shape of the Earth
The shape and size of the was a long debated thing but nobody was absolutely

sure about iis shape, When Asironaut Un Gagarine moved round the earth on 12th
April 1961 and could understand that the earth is round with a little flat m north-south.
Moreover, the picture taken by him is also round, but a little swelling to east-west.
Tt means the real shape of the earth is oblate spheroid.
14 Geography and Environment

As the shape of the earth is not fully round, so, its diameter in equatorial region from
east- west is 12,714 kilometres and north-south polar diameter is 12,75] kilometres.
For the benefit of measurement it is calculated as 12,800 kilometres. According to
this measurement the average radius is 6,400 kilometres. Equatorial diameter is
40,009 kilometres but for the benefit of rounding it is taken as 40,000 kilometres.

Latitude, longitude and other important lines

To locate a certain place on earth or to know its location, it is necessary to understand
the ‘latitude’ and ‘longitude’. The time of a certain place can be known from the
location of longiiude.The location from south or north can be known from latitude.
in the same way location from east or west can be known from prime meridian.

Latitude

A latitude is the angular distance of a place
north or south of the Equator. There are
180° parallels of latitude. Each parallel of
latitude is a circle. AU the parallels of
latitude are not of equal length. The
Equator, al O°, is the most important latitude
and the largest circle, It divides the earth
into Northern Hemisphere and the Southern
Hemisphere, The distance between any two
parallels of latitude is always equal, The North

Pole and the South Pole are the fixed points and

‘West

serve as basic points of reference (fig. 2.6). Fig. 2.6 : Angular distance from equator
North Pole = is .
90" Determining latitude

It is very necessary to determine latitude for a
geographer. We know that the angle of the centre
circle of the earth is 360°. The imaginary line is
actually the radius of the earth sphere. The value
of the angle thus formed through those two Lines
is equivalent to the latitude of that particular
place. Therefore, the latitude is the angular
distance of a place north or south of the equator.
If a line is drawn from any place on the earth to
South Pole its centre then that line will create an angle with

Fig. 2.7 : Equatorial plane, north pole the equatorial plane. The value of that angle is
and south pale

2025
2025

The Universe and Qur Earth 15

the latitude of that place (fig. 2.7), The latitude of a place situated to the north of the
equator is designated as the north latitude and that of the south as the south latitude, The
total value of the angle created by the circle at the centre of the earth is 360°. These
angles are being divided into degrees (°), minuets (') and seconds ("). Thus the value of
the equator 1s 0°. The latitude of the north pole is 90° North and that of the south pole
is 90° South.

Some latitudes are very famous.
One of them is 23.5" north latitude,
it is called the Tropic of Cancer and
23.5° south latitude is called the
Tropic of Capricorn. 66.5° north

“ey ne \ 4 1 a a .
/ ee a eo ee ee latitude is called Arctic Circle and
an W, FY Py L es Pe “ ae oe ’ . :
NK ‘gs fy-R2 FAT WEL similarly 66.5° south latitude is
2 ; 1 U 1 4
‘ eed 3 _ +” [EQUATOR called Antarctic Circle (fig. 2.8).
Von |E pat oats The equator is known as the great
aS. Tee an: circle.

There are different methods of

. 73 determining the latitude of a place.
Fig. 2.8 : Latitude and longitude Out of them we are discussing about
two methods.

1. Determination of latitude by sextant : Sextant is an insirument by which the
altitude of the sun can be measured. The latitude of any place can be determined
after finding out the altitude of the noon sun with the help of a sextant. The following
formula can be applied to find out the latitude of a place,

The formula is : 90° minus the altitude of the sun at noon + the sun's declination.

So, the latitude = 90° — (altitude of the declination) = 90°— (50°+ 12°) = 90°- 62° = 28°
south. If the place under consideration is in the northern hemisphere it will require to
add the declination value of north and to subtract the declination value of south.
Similarly if the place is in the southern hemisphere the declination value of south is to
add and that of the north to be subtracted.

2. Determining latitude with the help of a pole star : In the equator. the location of
the pole star is in the horizon and its latitude is 0°. From the equator towards north pole
for every 1° of approach the altitude also increases by 1°. Ultimately in the pole, the
altitude of the pole star rises lo 90°, So,the degree of latitude for the equator is 0° and
that of the north pole is 90°. In other words, the degree of latitude increases with

any approach towards the north pole.
16 Geography and Environment

Longitude Narth

Longitude is the angular distance of a place
east or west of the Prime Meridian. There are
360° meridians of longitude which run from
North Pole to South Pole. All longitudes
are half circles. The Prime Meridian is

es ot

longitude 0°, All meridians are of equal length “ cael /
but they are not parallel. The distance between : ea

any two meridian is not equal. They converge an

from the Equator to the Poles (fig. 2.9). Fig. 2.9 ; Longitude and angular distance

Determination of longitude : The longitude of a place can be determined by two
methods. These are : (1) by the difference of local time, (2) by Greenwich mean time.

(1) By the difference of local time : Whenever, the meridian of any place comes in
front of the sun 1e.when the sun appears just overheads then it is considered as noon
and the local time is taken as is noon. Ultimately other times of the place are
determined on the basis of local time.We know that there is a difference of 4 minutes
of time for 1° of difference of longitude. In other way. we can say that for every 4
minutes, the longitude ditfers by 1°. For example, if in any place, the local time is 12
noon, then the local time for any place located 10° east of the previous place will be
12:00 noon + (10 % 4) minutes or 12 hours 40 minutes, For the place lying 10° west of
the former place, the local time would be 12:00 noon — (10 X 4) minutes or 11 hours
20 minutes.

(2) By Greenwich mean time : In order to maintain international uniformity, one
uniform time, corresponding to the Prime Meridian, is adopted bY all countries. Each
place lying on this line of the world has ihe same time, called Greenwich Mean
Time. Every LS° east or west of Greenwich Meridian, the time changes by one hour.
East is ahead and west is behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT). The Greenwich
Meridian is 0° and 90° mendian run exactly in the middle of Bangladesh. So, the time
difference will be 90 * 4=360 minutes or 6 hours. This is the local time of 90°
meridian which is considered the standard time of Bangladesh. When it is 12 noon in
Bangladesh, London time is 6 in the morning.

Important lines

Equator: Keeping both the place in equal distance, an imaginary line has been drawn
which encircles the globe from west to cast is known as the equator. Others name
of equator— 0° latitude and great circle.

2025
The Universe and Our Earth 17

Tropic of cancer and tropic of capricorn : The
23.5" latitude in the northem and southern

hemisphere are know as the Tropic of cancer and
the Tropic of capricorn. The Tropie of cancer

passes through the central part of Bangladesh.
In the middle region of these two lines,

"| ate =)

sunshine falls on the earth perpendicularly. on
Arctic circle and antarctic circle : The 66.5° ae aS.

north and south latitudes are known as the — . 1). Z insaiena
Arctic and Antarctic circles (fig. 2.10). oo ning eeilien mee

| Task : Find out the capital cities of ihe neighbourimg countries by their latitudes
and longitudes.

International Date Line

To move from the east and west of the meridian according to longitudinal rules, 4
minutes very for 1* longitude. We know that longitude of 180° east and west is just of
the opposite side of 0°,

As per 1° for 4 minutes then 180° is equal to 180 * 4 = 720 minutes that means the
difference is 12 hours. In this way 24 hours vary by 12 hours both in each direction east
and west, To the east 12 hours leads to the increase and to the west 12 hours decrease.
It means, 24 hours vary in the some longitude 180°.

In 1884 in United States of America, an international convention regarding ‘Longitude
and Time’ created a special longitudinal line. It identified the 180° longitudinal line as
the International Date Line (fig. 2.11).

We can see in the map at 6:00. am on 16 December at Greenwich if we count time to the
eastward and reach at 180° East longitude the time is 6:00 pm on 15 December.
Because time increases to the eastward and decreases to the westward. Time differs 24
hours and the date is different. To avoid this problem enervation date time has been
introduced on the Pacific Ocean following 180° longitude of the map.

Forma-3, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
18

ieee

ate

eo NS aN
COHN

Monday 3° Greenwie

Geography and Environment

Ships or planes when

they cross

according to

they deduct a
(fig. 2.12).

Fig. 2.11 ; The difference betweens intemational date lime and local time

the

International Date

the

direction Line, add or
subtract aday they are
travelling in. When
travelling eastward ,
they add a day. When

travelling westward,

day

The International Date Line is not a straight line. The longitude of 180° passes through
many islands in the Pacific Ocean. The International Date Line has

curved in some places. Though running
along 180° east and west longitude over the
Pacific ocean but to avoid the land masses
of north eastern Siberia and Aleutian,
Figi and Chatham islands. The International
Date Line has been curved 11° towards
the east in Aleutian, Figi and Chatham
islands to avoid land masses and 12° east
in the Bering Strait over the water bodies,

If it was not drawn this way, the people
would have to count two different local times
in the same place of the island.

Task : Write about the importance of

International Date Line in human lite
(pair work).

been

or

iy Hewat Balan

Ghatham island

sas”? tao” 165” ww asa”
Fig. 2.12 : International date line

436"

2025
2025

The Universe and Our Earth 19

Nor The antipodes : The earth is round, so it has an
LAS EF opposite place on the other side of the earth. From
any point of the earth surface any imaginary line
crossing through the centre of the earth is called
the Antipode of the first point i.e. opposite side of
the earth (fig. 2.13).

A certain place situated in a particular longitude is

situated in the opposite longitudinal line. Tt means
the summing up result will be 180°. As the distance
Fig. 2.13 : The antipodes between two longitudes will be 180° the time
difference will be 180 X 4 = 720 minutes or 12
hours = 12 hours,

Task : Find out the antipodes of Dhaka of the globe in group.

Rotation of the earth

The Earth has bvo motions or movements, rotation and revolution. It was thought
earlier that the earth was stationery and the sun moved round the earth. But it was
proved later that the sun is stationery and the earth moves round the sun. The earth
moves round the sun on its own axis once every 24 hours a day. The axis of the
earth is mclimed at an angle of 23 degrees 30 mimutes with the perpendicular to its
plane of orbit. The earth moves from west to east on tis own axis a day. Movement on

its own axis a day is called Rotation and movement round the sun a year on orbit is
called Revolution.

Rotation

The movement of the earth around the Sun is called its Rotation. The path along
which the Earth travels around the Sun is called the Orbit,

Different places on the Earth's surface move at different speeds. Places near the Poles
hardly show any movement, while those at the Equator spin around at more than
1,600 kilomeires per hour.

We are not thrown away from the earth surface and we don't feel it inspite of the
motion of the earth, The reasons are :

1. Humans, animals, air etc. move in the same speed along with the surface of the
earth so we don’t feel the motion of the earth.
20

ht

Geography and Environment

The earth attracts all the things towards its centre by its gravitation power, so we

are not thrown away from it.

3.. We don't feel earth’s motion or we are not thrown away as we are too small

compared to its huge size,

4, We don’t feel the motion as the motion of moving of the earth is certain at every

place.

5. If one thing out of two moves and another one keeps standing on earth, then
it is understood that it has motion.Thus, there is no matter before the earth which
is static or equal though we can understand the motion of the earth.

Proofs of rotation

The proof that the earth moves from the west towards the east on its own axis is :

1. Pictures sent by spacecraft : Pictures sent from the satellite and spacecraft show
that the earth moves [rom west to east. These pictures are the most modem and
correct proof of earth's movement or rotation.

Fig. 2.14: Size of the earth

2. The size of the earth :]f any delicate round shaped
thing spins on ils own axis like a top, a
centripetal and centrifugal power develops at a time
which makes the poles a little bit compressed and
middle part a little bit enlarged. By virtue of
movement at the time of birth the delicate earth got
squeezed in the north and south poles a little bit
and centre part swelled up. Scientist Newton said, this
size of the earth has become like this due to this

movement (fig. 2.14). Northern Hemisphere
3. Cause of day-night: In most parts of the world there Low Pressure High Pressure
mo
e

is day and night. It means 12 hours day and 12 hours night
which are the principal reasons of rotation of the earth. If

there was po rotation then one part of the earth would
have been dark for ever and the other part would have High Pressure Low Pressure

been sunny. Low Pressure High Pressure
4, Ferrel’s law: We know that sea waves and air turns

tight hand side in the north pole and left hand side in ‘a
the south pole. This turning away is known as Ferrel’s 4 Kis

law (fig. 2.15).

High Pressure Low Pressure

Results of rotation : The changes we see because Souther Hemisphere

of the rotation are :

Fig. 2.15 : Ferrel’s law

2025
2025

The Universe and Our Earth 21

1. Occurrence of day and night in the world : Day and nightis the result of rotation.
The earth is round and it does not haye any light of its own, The earth gets light from
the sun. The Earth during movement around its axis, becomes lighted with the rays
of the sun. When it faces the Sun, that partis day, And the opposite side remains
dark as the sunlight does not reach there. This dark part is night (fig. 2.16).

Evening Due to rotation of the earth,
alternately the illuminated portion

WL becomes dark and the dark portion

4a : becomes illuminated and that is
. d =—— -— why the day and ni ght occur.
; v; When the dark portion 1s

illuminated, it becomes day and

¥ similarly the illuminated portion

turns dark. it becomes night there.

Tig, 2,16 : Occurrence of day and night In this process, day and night
occur. So, in some places it is 12 hours of day and 12 hours of night.

2, The cause of the high and low tide : High tide and low tide happen due to
rotation of the earth. Tide does not occur at the same time everyday. For example,
time of high tide in two consecutive days may vary by 52 minutes. This time
difference occurs because of rotation.

3. The cause of air and sea wave : From the equator to both the poles the diameter
of latitude and the motion of earth's movement become slower gradually near the
two poles. The air wave or sea wave of the earth turn away towards right side in the
north pole and left side in the south without going down directly from high pressure
to low pressure zone.

4. The cause of temperature difference: At day time, temperature rises
because of sunshine, At night it cools down after radiating heat. If there were no
rotation, night would not have come after day and the difference of temperature
would not occur. This difference of temperature is one of the results of rotation,

5. Measuring time : It becomes easier to measure lime because of rotation. One-
twenty fourth time which is full round of one movement is taken as one hour and its
one sixtieth part is called one minute. And one sixtieth part is counted as one second,
6. Animal and plant world : Because of the rotation of the earth all parts of earth
experience sunlight at day time and no light at night time. Sunlight is necessary for
plants and animals. They collect energy from the sun at day time and utilize it for
22 Geography and Environment

their metabolism at night. Some animals collect food at day time while some do
it at night. Day and night occur because of earth’s rotation and the miles and
regulations of plants and animals depend mostly on it.

Revolution

The earth moves continuously on its axis towards a particular direction because
of the gravitation of the sun (opposite of the hands of watch) and moves round the
sup at a certain period. This motion of the earth is called Revolution.

Tt takes 365 days 5 hours 48 minutes 47 seconds to move round the sun once. It is
called Solar Year. But we take 365 days as one year. According to this account, extra
6 hours remain every year. To bring a balance for this extra time in every 4 years in

the month of February, 24 hours or | day is added. Thus, in the year in which February
is of 29 days there are 366 days and this is called a leap Year.

Task : Find out the Leap Year trom 2015 to 2030,

The results of revolution ; The results of Revolution are : (1) the increase and
decrease of day and night, (2) season change.

The increase and decrease of day and night: The real causes of the increase and
decrease of day and night are:

(a) Earth’s round shape with curves in two poles, (b) Earth’s parabolic orbit, (c)
Earth's continuous rotation and revolution, (d)Location of poles in the one direction,
(e) Angular location of the earth on its axis.

At the time of revolution earth leans itself on 66.5" angle towards the Sun. On 21st March

the sunshines vertically on the equator, Then, the sunshine goes towards north pole
gradually.

On 21st June the earth comes to a certain
place where the sun rays fall on the earth's
surface at 23.5° north latitude (fig. 2.17).
During this time the north pole leans
toward the sun and south pole is far away
from the sun. For this reason the length of
the day is longer and the temperature is
higher in the north pole. In the north pole

the longest day and shortest night is
South Pole June 21, On this day, the sun reaches

Fig. 2.17 : Angular location the Tropic of cancer.
of the earth on its axis

2025
2025

The Universe and Our Earth 23

On the 23rd September the sun again shines vertically on the equator like 21st March.
So, the day and night are equal. From 23rd Seplember the sun starts moving again
towards south pole. On December 22 the sun rays fall on the Tropic of capricom
causing the longest day in South Pole, and shortest day in the North Pole.

On 21st March and 23rd September the sun shines vertically on equator, These two
days and nights are equal all over the world. That day is called Equinox, On
March 21 there is Spring in the north pole, so it is called Vernal Equinox.
On 23rd September there is Autumn in the north pole, and the day is called
Autumnal Equinox.

Proofs of revolution

1. Displacement, disappearance and reappearing of stars in the night sky: Ina
cloudless night sky it is seen that the stars change their place from east to west.
Then one day they disappear. After one year they come back to their onginal place.
This change proves that the earth has motion.

2. The change of location of the sun in the sky : The sum is seen in different
places in different times. Tt does not mse im the east from the same place everyday
and does not set in the west im the same place.Six months of the year the sun moves
a little towards south and nse from the east, The rest six months, it moves towards the
north and then rises in the east. If the world had not moved and stayed in a fixed place,
the sun would have risen from the same place. Tt happens due to the revolution of the
earth.

3. The revolution of different planets : It is seen through the telescope that all the
planets are moving round the sum. The earth is a planet, so it also has motion or
revolution.

4. Direct experience : The astronauts saw the motion of the earth from the space.

5. Gravitational theory : The earth is very small compared to the size of the Sun. The
Sun is 13 lakh times bigger than the earth. So, usually the earth moves round the sun
because ofits gravitational force.

Change of season

The entire year is divided into several parts according to the difference of temperature.
Each part is called a Season. The whole year is divided into 4 parts according to the
difference of temperature. They are: Summer, Autumn, Winter and Spring. We know,
the entire world is divided into two poles. The northern part of the equator is north
pole and the southern part is south pole. When there is summer in the north pole,
winter prevails in the south pole. Again, when there is winter in the north pole, there
24 Geography and Environment

is summer in south pole. In the same way, when there is Spring in the north pole,
there is Autumn in the south pole. And Autumn comes to the Northpole and spring is
in the South pole. The geographical location of Bangladesh is in the north pole. Here
extreme heat is felt around the month of June. During this period cold winter prevails
in the south pole.

Causes of Seasonality : There are causes [or changing the season on earth :

(1) Increase and decrease of heat because of the difference of temperature in
day and night in different parts of the world :The sun comes near the pole which
sees the longest day and shortest night because of the revolution of earth. Its
opposite pole experiences longest night and smallest day. The earth receives
temperature at day time and the land surface becomes heated. And at night, it
becomes cool after radiating the heat. During this time the amount of temperature it
absorbs in the longer day, the same amount of temperature cannot radiate in a shorter

night. That place experiences hot weather because of the heat stored there and
summer is felt there. In the opposite pole the day is small and the heat it absorbs

cannot radiate at night and winter is felt there.

(2) The round shape of the earth: As the earth is round, the sun rays fall on
somewhere vertically and somewhat obliquely As a result, there is difference of
temperature and the chanve of season.

(3) Parabolic orbiting path of the earth : The orbiting path of the earth is parabolic.
80, the distance between the earth and the sun increases and decreases at different
times of the year. Temperature changes because of it and so the season changes.
(4) Angular location on the orbit of the earth : At the time of revolution, earth's
polar region lies towards the same direction at 66.5" angle without making a right
angle. For this reason the north pole and the south pole come near ihe sun due to il once
a year. The pole which bends towards
Att the sun, experiences Vertical sunshine,
Whe, Vertical Sua Rays At that time it experiences the highest
temperature. When the sun does not
shine vertically, the temperature falls
and the season changes.

(5) Due to revolution : The sunshine
falls on different places due to
revolution and the difference of

temperature of air occurs. As a result,
+ the difference is seen in climate. It is

E Fig. 2.18 : The sun light falling vertically on the :
‘A’ location gets hotter then that of ‘B’ location called Changing of season.

2025
The Universe and Our Earth 25

The process of Seasonality: We know there are four seasons on earth—
Summer, Autumn, Winter and Spring. Now we will see how the season changes.
The causes of changing season can be learnt from the four locations of the earth during

its moving round the sun.

Summer in the north pole and winter in the south pole: After 21st March the
earth bends towards the sun gradually when going forward on its axis, in this situation
the greater is the lighted up days in the north pole. Following this system
on 21st June the sun starts shining vertically on the Tropic of cancer, $0, 21st June
has the longest day and the shortest night in the North Pole. That day is the last day
of the Sun to come towards the north, from next day tt again starts coming back to
the South Pole. In the North Pole before the beginning of summer it starts one and a
half months earlier because of the day being bigger and the next one and half

months Summer lasts. During Summer time in South Pole just the opposite
situation is seen and winter is set. The sun shines for a lesser period because of its
bending position. So, the day becomes shorter and night is longer. At day time the
surface becomes heated, at night it becomes cooler because of the radiation of
heat. Then winter weather prevails there. In the South Pole this time is called
Winter Season (fig. 2.19).
N. Pele
Day and Night of Equal Duratien

=== ==,

~~

N. Poles” 5. Pole A. Pole

Longest Night \W
2 Nadal a
Longest ne

Short
Shetest Night rs ae

22nd December,
Winter Solstice

5. Pol N. Pol Day and Ni At wf S. Pole
A : Equal Du
a, sis ati®
§. Poie

2 ist Mareh Vernal Equinax
Fig. 2-19 : Revolution of earth - fluctuation of day and night - change of season

Autumn in the north pole and spring in the south pole : From June 2) the
South Pole starts bending towards the Sun. The parts of South Poles experiences less

sunshine and the parts of south see more sunshine. So, on September 23 the sum

Forma-4, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
26 Geography and Environment

shines vertically on the equator. Therefore, day and night become equal everywhere at
that time. The heat absorbed at day time gets radiated at night. So, the amount of
heat and cold in the weather remains same. During this time Autumn and Spring
prevail in North and South Poles respectively. One and a half months before the 23rd
SeptemberAutumn dawns in the North Pole and it lasts for one and a half months.

Winter in the north pole and summer in the south pole : After September 23
the earth starts bending towards the sun, during this time the South Pole comes closer
ito the sun, The North Pole starts going further away. So, the sun shines vertically in
the south and angularly in the north pole. As a result, the day becomes shorter in the
North and longer day and shorter night in the South Pole. On the 22nd December

the sunshines vertically on the Tropic of capricorn. On that day, day becomes shorter
and night becomes longer in North Pole. and so winter season dawns. That is the last

day of the sun to go 23rd September
towards south and from
the next day the sun again
starts coming towards
the north. Winter season
begins in the North Pole

before one and a_ half
months of December 22

22nd December 21st June

and continues upto one

and half months. During

this period summer

21st March
prevails in the South Pole. Fig. 2:20 : Seasons of the earth

Spring in the north pole and autumn in the south pole : On moving in its own
orbit the earth comes back to such a place after December 22 up to such a place
between December 22 and March 21 that it starts shining vertically on the equator.
So, day and night become equal all over the world on March 21. The air space
remains heated at day time because of sunshine and at night 1 gets cooled after
radiating heat, During this period spring is in the North pole and Autumn in the South

2025
2025

The Universe and Our Earth 27

P

ole, On March 21 day and night become equal all over the world and that day is

called Vernal Equinox (fig. 2.20).

Impact of changing season

The change of season controls the lifestyles of human beings.

It influences the economic activities as well as the professions of human beings.
Many places in the world appear to be the centres of recreation due to season change.
‘The change of season controls the growth and distribution of animal kingdom.

Different kinds of natural disaster are related with the change of season.

Task : Fill in the blanks in the table below in a group.
What happens in the case of northern hemisphere?

Time The rays of the sun | Information on Names of seasons
falling vertically on) day and night
geographical lines during

revolution of the earth

21st June Tropic of cancer

23rd September | Equator

22nd December | ‘Tropic of capricorn

21st March Equator

Exercise

Multiple choice questions

1. Which planet does have 22 satellites?

a. Mars b, Jupiter

c. Satum d. Uranus
28 Geography and Environment

2. Due to revolution —
i, day and night oceur in the world.
il. season changes.
iii. temperature gets different.
Which one of the following is correct?
a, jand ij b. ij and iii
ce. iand ili d. i, iiand iii

From the following figure give answer to the questions of 3 and 4.

3. Which vertical line marked by 0° is called —

a. Equator b. Axis

c. Prime meridian d. Tropic of cancer
4. The above lines are important because by them —

i. local time and standard time can be determined.

ii. the exact location of a certam place can be known.

iu. the night location of the ship bound for sea can be known.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iand ii b. iand iii

c. iand ili d. i, iband ili

2025
2025

The Universe and Qur Earth 29

Creative questions

1.
|
a. Whatis moon?
b. What do you understand by Equator?
c. Explain why the planet marked with ‘P* is suitable for animals living.
d. Make a comparative analysis of the planets marked by ‘Q" and ‘R’.
2. 23rd September

tal Marth

a. Which one is the longest day in the northern hemisphere?
b. What is meant by Leap Year? Explain.
¢. Explain how day and night will be changed in the place “W"?

d. Is the same season seen in the place “W" and “X’ during the rotation of earth?

Describe tt.
