Chapter Seven

Chemical Reactions

We know, properties, characteristics and changes of substances are the
topics discussed in chemistry. The elements in nature are constantly changing.
Transformation to a different state is called a physical change while changing
into a new element with new properties is called a chemical change. These
changes occur due to certain physical and chemical reactions. This chapter will
discuss elaborately on kinds of reactions, rates of reactions etc.

2025
2025

Chemical Reactions 143

differentiate between physical changes and chemical reactions

identify chemical reactions by analyzing the changes in a substance
classify the chemical reactions- redox/non-redox, reversible;
irreversible, endothermic/exothermic and detect the types of reactions
explain the amount of products gained through chemical reactions in
terms of Le Chatelier’s principle

detect the type of redox-nonredox reactions by analyzing the change
explain many reactions taking place in various fields of real life

find out ways to prevent or control the harmful reactions in real-life
situation (like, ways of prevention of rusting on iron made materials)
explain and compare concerned reaction rates

examine and compare the reaction speed or rate by using various
materials

show consciousness in using metal substance in our daily life

show the differences in the reaction rate through experiments
demonstrate the acid-base neutralization reaction and precipitation

reactions
144 Chemistry

7.1 Changes of Matter

The substances existing in nature undergo changes due to heat, pressure and
contact with other substances. There are two types of changes: physical change
and chemical change.

7.11 Physical Change

All chemical substances consist of one or more elements. Sometimes, changes
occur only in physical conditions of a substance leaving their chemical structure
unchanged. This is called a physical change. For example, a solid piece of ice, if
kept at room temperature, absorbs heat from the environment and gradually
melts into liquid water. Again, heating liquid water up to 100°C will see the
water vaporize into air. Here, the molecular formula of all three- water, ice and
vapor is the same- H,O. That means each molecule of them has the same two
hydrogen and one oxygen atoms in them. Therefore, all three substances are the
same, only their physical states are different- ice is solid while water is liquid
and vapor is gaseous. This kind of change ts called a physical change.

ice +heat water +heat me
(solid) ~ cold (liquid) cold
(-heat) (-heat)

7.1.2 Chemical Change

Sometimes, due to the change of external temperature or pressure and contact
with some other substance, some substances change completely into newer
substances with newer percent composition of the existing elements. This kind
of change is called a chemical change, That means, the kind of change that forms
newer substances with newer set of properties is called a chemical change. The
new substance formed through chemical change gets the same molecules that
were there in the original elements. Isolated ions or atoms are formed out of the
dissociation in the bond of the previous element. These isolated ions or atoms
later constitute new bonds among themselves and create new molecules. As a
result, chemical change also implies dissociation of old bonding and formation
of new bonding too. The gas we use for cooking basically consists of methane
(CH,). When methane gas is burnt in oxygen, carbon dioxide, water vapor and
heat energy 1s produced. This is a chemical change.

2025
Chemical Reactions 144

CHig) + Og) M+ Og) + H,0(l)

Similarly, calcium carbonate reacts with hydrochloric acid and produces
calcium chloride, carbon dioxide and water. This is also a chemical change.

CaCO; (s) + 2HCl (aq) ———— > CaCl, (aq) + CO, (g) + H,0 ())

7.2 Classification of Chemical Reactions

We can classify the chemical reactions on the basis of following way:

7.2.1 Direction of Reaction

According to direction of reaction, chemical reactions are of two kinds:
Irreversible reactions and Reversible reactions.

Irreversible Reactions

In irreversible reactions, only the reactants convert to products. Products cannot
be converted to reactants by a reaction if any one of the products from the
reaction is removed from the reaction medium. For example, calcium
carbonate, when heated in a container breaks into solid limestone and gaseous
carbon dioxide. If the carbon dioxide gas is removed from the container, then
too, the limestone will not convert back to calcium carbonate. Thus, it is an
irreversible reaction. Irreversible reactions are written in equations with a right
faced arrow (—) mark in the midst of reactants and products.

CaCO, (s) neat CaO (s) + CO,(g)

Reversible Reactions

In a reversible reaction, the reactants react and convert to products and the
products react again and revert to reactants. In reversible reactions, two
reactions continue simultaneously. In one reaction, the reactants react and

Forma-19, Chemistry Class-9-10
146 Chemistry

produce the product, which is called a forward reaction. In the other one, the
products react again and convert to the reactant, which is called a backward
reaction. Reversible reactions are written m the equation with double headed
half arrow marks in the midst of reactants and products. For example, ethanol
and ethanoic acid react in the presence of hydrochloric acid and produce ethy]
ethanoate ester and water. Conversely, ethyl ethanoate ester and water react with
each other and produce ethanol and ethanoic acid. In an equation, it can be

shown as,
HC]
CHOH + CH,COOoH = <——— CH,COOC;H, + H,0
Ethanol Ethanoic acid Ethyl ethanoate ester Water

Similarly. hydrogen and iodine react and produce hydrogen todide as a product
and this product again converts into hydrogen and iodine. This is also a
reversible reaction.

——s

+l =

ZHI

Indeed, all reactions are reversible reactions, but in some reactions, the
backward reaction is of so slow rate, that they appear to be irreversible
reactions.

7.2.2 Heat Change and Reactions

You have already learned that heat change is a factor in chemical reactions.
According to absorption of heat and generation of heat, reactions are classified
into two categories: exothermic reactions and endothermic reactions.

Exothermic Reactions

When heat evolves at the time of producing the products from the reactants, the
reaction is called an exothermic reaction. For example, | mole nitrogen and 3
moles hydrogen in the Heber process produce 2 mole ammonia and 92 kilojoules
of heat. The reaction 1s:

Fe.

N; (g) + 3H, (g) ————_ 4g) + 22K
200-250 atm
450°C-550°C

20235
2025

Chemical Reactions 147

Here, ground Fe acts as the catalyst. According to the balanced equation, the
heat change during a reaction is called reaction heat. It is denoted by AH. If heat
is evolved during a reaction, its value is negative.

Fe
N; (g) + 3H; (g) —————__ NH (g) | AN=-92
200-250 atm

450°C-550°C

Endothermic Reactions

When heat is absorbed at the time of producing the products from the reactants,
the reaction is called an endothermic reaction. 1 mole nitrogen and 1 mole
oxygen react and produce 2 moles nitric oxide. When they do so, they absorb
180 kJ heat. This is an endothermic reaction.

N.(g) + O2(g) + 180 kj ——_ 2NO(g)

Here also, we can use the symbol of heat AH. In endothermic reactions, the value
of absorbed heat is positive.

N(g) + O3(g) — 2NO(g) ; AH =+ 180 kj

7.2.3 Electron Transfer

Depending on electron transfer, reactions can be divided into two types: redox
reactions and non redox reactions.

Redox Reactions

The term Redox combines the initial part of Reduction, Red and the initial part
of Oxidation, Ox. It means oxidation-reduction. In redox reactions, there occurs
an electron transfer in the reaction. A reactant donates an electron and the other
reactant receives that electron. That means, a redox reaction is divided in two
parts. In one part, the donation of the electron takes place which is called
oxidation half reaction. In the other half, the other reactant accepts the donated
electron, which is called the reduction half reaction. The reactant which donates
the electron in such a reaction ts called reductant and the one which accepts the
electron is called oxidant.
148 Chemistry

Na++Cl, ——* Nacl

Here, Na is donating an electron as tt is a reductant substance and conversely, Cl
is accepting that electron as it is an oxidant substance.

The reaction m which electron donation of an atom occurs or positive charge of
that atom increases or negative charge of that decreases is called an oxidation
reaction.

Fe2+ > Fe? + e~ [oxidation reaction]

Na > Nal + e [oxidation reaction]

The reaction in which an atom accepts an electron or the positive charge of an
atom decreases or the negative charge of an atom increases is called an reduction

reaction. ;
cf+e — cP [reduction reaction]

cu2++ e + Cul [reduction reaction]

Oxidation Number: Atoms in molecules or radicals sometimes tend to donate
electrons and sometimes tend to accept electrons. The tendency to donate an
electron of an atom is denoted by a number added with a plus (+) mark and the
tendency to accept an electron of an atom is denoted by a number added with a
minus (-) mark. In any molecule or radical, this number with plus or minus mark

is the oxidation number.

The oxidation number of neutral atoms like Na, My. Fe etc. are taken to be zero
(0). Similarly, atoms in molecules that consist of homogenous atoms like H,, O,,
N, CL, Br, ete. are regarded to have oxidation number of zero.

The oxidation number of Fe in FeSO, is +2 while the oxidation number of the
same atom in Fe metal is 0.

Determining Oxidation Number: In a compound the oxidation number of an
element depends on the oxidation numbers of other elements of the compound.
To determine the oxidation number of an element in a compound, standard

oxidation numbers of other elements is used.

£023
2025

Chemical Reactions 149

Table 7.01: Oxidation Number of Atoms in Different Compounds.

: Formula of | Element and
Rule of Oxidation Number Co ~ Oxidation
ompoune’ | Number
| Oxidation number of metals is positive and | Nacl Na = +1
| oxidation number of nonmetals is negative Cl=:-1
Oxidation number of a neutral or free elementis | Fe, H, Fe =
| Zero H=0
Total oxidation number of atoms of a neutral | 129 Bate
‘ O = -2
compound is zero
GIG = 2
Total Oxidation number of atoms of a charged | 50,7, NH, | SOZ= -2
_ ion is equal to their charge NH, = +1
_ Oxidation number of alkali metals is +1 Kel, K,CO, | K = +1
Oxidation number of alkaline earth metals is +2 | 89, Mg50O,4 | Ca = +2
—_— : _| Me = +2
Oxidation number of halogen in metal halide is -1) mgcl,, Licl | Cl = -1
| In most compounds, Oxidation number of hydrogen is) ;WEL. LiAIH, | H = +1
+1 but Oxidation number of hydrogen in metal * °
| hydride is -1 Hi=<t
_In most compounds (oxides), Oxidation number of | K,0, CaO O=-2
oxygen is -2 but Oxidation number of oxygen in 0, H,0 Buwt
peroxide is -1 and Oxidation number of oxygen in|“? "7"? 7 =
superoxide is -1/2 (i.¢.- 0.5) NaOy KO, ian

1, Let us suppose the oxidation number of the atom in a compound or ion that is
to be determined is x.

2. Oxidation numbers of all elements in the compound or ion are to be
multiplied with their respective number of atoms and then their total is to be
found.

3, In the case of molecules, the total will be zero (0) and in the case with ions, it
will be equal to its number of charges added with the marks. For example, we
need to determime the oxidation number of central atom Mn im KMn0O,.
Suppose, the oxidation number of Mn is x, oxidation number of K is +1 and O
is -2. The total in the formula presented above will be equal to the oxidation
150 Chemistry

number of KMnO,. KMnO, is a charge neutral molecule, therefore, its charge is

0. So,
(+1)x1 + xx1 + (-2)x4 =0
Oo k= 7

The oxidation number of Mn is +7.

4. Apart from metal hydride (like LiH, LiAIH:) the oxidation number of
hydrogen is generally +1. Apart from the exceptions mentioned in table 7.01,
the oxidation number of oxygen is -2,

Determining the oxidation number of S$ in H,SO,
Suppose, the oxidation number of 8S =x
Therefore, (+1)x2 +x + (-2)x4 =0

Or, x =6

The oxidation number of § in H,SO, is +6

Find out the oxidation number of the elements written in red colour among
the following compounds: CuSO,, HNO,, H,PO,, MnO,, K,Cr,O,, Na,5,0,,
Cul.

Given: Oxidation numbers of Cu = +2, 0 =-2, H=+1, K=+4+1, Na=+1,1=
-1.

es al

Oxidation number and valency are not the same. Oxidation number is the
number of charges in an atom or ion along with its sign. It may be positive or
negative, integer or [raction. The oxidation number of an element may vary in
different compounds. On the other hand, valency is the capacity of an element to
bond with other elements. It is always an integer and is never positive or nega-
tive. Only, in the case of inert gases, the valency is zero.

2025
2025

Chemical Reactions 131

Oxidation-reduction is a simultaneous process: You already know what ts
oxidation and what is reduction and what is an oxidant and what is a reductant.
Oxidation-reduction reactions takes place simultaneously. Let us consider the
reaction below:

Na +5 Cl —— Nacl

Here, the reduction agent Na has donated one electron from its outermost shell
to complete the oxidation half reaction. The oxidant Cl
has accepted that electron and completed the reduction half reaction.

Oxidation half reaction Na° + Na* + e
Reduction half reaction c]®« e —s c]
Tf we add these two half reactions, we get the oxidation-reduction reaction.

Na®+ Ci? Nat + cl = Nacl

It is clear here that the reduction agent has donated the electron to the oxidation
agent. If oxidation agent Cl wouldn’t accept the electron, the reduction agent Na
would not have been able to donate the electron. So, it can be said, oxidation and
reduction will occur together, They are simultaneous processes.

Since the reductant donates an electron and the oxidant accepts that electron,
therefore, oxidation-reduction is actually the transfer of electrons.

There are some reactions where oxidation-reduction occurs. They are:
1. Addition Reaction

2. Decomposition Reaction

3. Substitution or Displacement Reaction

4.Combustion Reaction
152 Chemistry

1. Addition Reaction: A reaction in which a new compound is formed by
combination of two or more elements or molecules is called an addition
reaction. For example, chlorine adds with ferrous chloride and produces ferric
chloride:

2FeCl,(aq) + Clg) ————— FecCl,{aq)

Similarly, hydrogen gas combines with nitrogen gas and forms ammonia gas:
N, + 3H, —M———» 2NH,

However, the addition reaction where two or more elements combine together to
form a new compound is called synthesis. According to this definition, the
reaction for ammonia gas is also a synthesis.

2. Decomposition Reaction: The process in which a compound breaks into one
or more elements or molecules is called a decomposition reaction. For example,
when heat is applied on phosphorus pentachloride, it decomposes into
phosphorus trichloride and chlorine.

heat
PCI, a PCl, + Ch

Similarly, one water molecule decomposes to produce two different molecules
on electrolysis, Hydrogen and oxygen are produced in cathode and anode.

electrolysis

2H,0 (1) ————> 2H,(2) + O,(g)

3. Substitution or Displacement Reaction: The process in which an element or
radical displaces another element or radical from a compound and takes its place
is called a substitution reaction. For example, zine metal displaces hydrogen
from sulfuric acid to form zine sulfate and hydrogen gas:

Zn(s) + H,S0,(1) ——————* 2ZnS0,(aq) + H,(g)
zinc sulfate

2025
Chemical Reactions 153

4. Combustion Reaction: The process in which
any compound or element is burnt in the presence
of atmospheric oxygen and converts to oxides of
its elements is called a combustion reaction.

«
a | SP ee

Usually heat is evolved in combustion reactions. €. Nisa? P)
Pt ee o es add

This process also involves electron exchange, For

example, natural gas or methane reacts with
oxygen of air and produces carbon dioxide and Fig 7.01: combustion of fuel.
water.

CH,(g) + 20,(g) ————* C0,(g) + 2H,0(g) + Heat
Similarly, S, C, Mg and H, produce their oxides and heat evolves when they are
burnt.

S(s) + O2(g) ——— > $0,(g) + Heat
c(s) + O{g) Mm———~ cColg) + Heat
2Mg(s) + O.{g) —mMm—» 2Mg0(g) + Heat
2H,(g) + O{g) m+ 2H,0(g) + Heat

In all combustion reactions, oxygen accepts an electron donated by the other
element or compound. Therefore, this kind of a reaction belongs to the
oxidation-reduction type.

Non Redox

There are some reactions where electron exchange does not occur. These
reactions are called non-redox reactions. In this kind of reaction, there is no
involvement of increase or decrease of oxidation number of any reactant because
there is no electron exchange. Some of these kinds of reactions are discussed
below: (1) Neutralization reaction (2) precipitation reaction etc.

1. Neutralization Reaction: An acid and a base react with each other and
neutralize into salt and water, in some reactions, which ate known as
neutralization reactions. They are also known as acid-base reactions. NaOH and
HCl, for example neutralize each other and convert to NaCl salt and water:

HCl(aq) + NaOH(aq) ——————* Natl(aq) + H,0())

Forma -20, Chemistry Class-9-10
154 Chemistry

Heat always evolves from neutralization reactions. That is to say, neutralization
reactions are exothermic. When both the acid and base are strong, the evolved
heat amounts to AH = -57.34kJ. In this kind of a reaction, the acid provides the
hydrogen ion (H*) while the base provides the hydroxide ion (OH). These two
ions then react and produce water. In NaCl solution, sodium ion is Na’ and
chlorine ion is Cr.

H* + Cl + Nat + OH” ———_+ Nat +Cl +H,0

In this solution, the two ions Na*, Cl do not participate in the reaction. They are
called spectator ions. The actual equation of a neutralization reaction is:

Ht+OH ——> H,0+ 57.34kj

Finally, neutralization reaction is the water producing reaction by means of H*
and OH- ions. Whatever the strength of both the acid and the base we take in this
kind of reaction they will provide the same ions and produce water. The amount
of heat that evolves to produce | mole water is called neutralization heat.
Calculation tells us that it evolves 57.34 kJ heat.

Demonstration of the Neutralization Reaction. Y
Take 10 mL NaOH solution in a beaker. Take HCl! solution in another
beaker. Dip a blue litmus paper in the solution. Now use your left hand to
pour HCI solution with a dropper in the NaOWl solution, Simultaneously
use a glass tube m your right hand to stir and mix the solutions. The
moment the blue litmus paper turns red, you will understand HC] has
neutralized the NaOH solution.

Me HCl(aq) + NaOH(ag) —————® NaClaq) + H,00) /

20235
2025

Chemical Reactions 153:

2. Precipitation Reaction: When two soluble compounds are mixed in a certain
solvent and if any new compound is produced that is insoluble or sparsely
soluble in that solvent, the compound settles at the bottom of the container as a
solid. This new solid compound at the bottom is called the precipitate. The
reaction in which the produced compound settles at the bottom of the container
as precipitate is called the precipitation reaction. For example, when silver
nitrate (AgNO,) solution is mixed with sodium chloride (NaCl) solution, they
react to produce silver chloride and sodium nitrate. NaNO, is highly soluble in
water, so it remains dissolved in the solution. But since solubility of AgCl is
sparse, it settles at the bottom as precipitate:

NaCl(aq) + AgNO,(aq) oe Agcl(s)| + NaNO;(aq)
When you add barium chloride (BaCl,) solution with sodium sulfate (Na,SO,)
solution, they produce barium sulfate (BaSO,) and sodium chloride (NaCl).
Barium sulfate is precipitated.

Na,SO,{aq) + BaClaq) ————*  BasS0,(s)| + 2NaCl(aq)
However, there are some precipitation reactions in which there occurs an
electron exchange. You will know about them in higher classes.

fi ™)
Demonstration of a Precipitation
a. Reaction.
SONIOn
ofNaOH | * TT In a test tube, take 2-3 mL ferrous
sulfate solution and add NaOH solution
Aqueous |_| =| | = ecu that in drops. You will see a green
solution affa(on, precipitate is forming gradually and
of Fes, settling at the bottom of the tube.The
Se two chemical compounds are forming
Fig 7.02: Precipitation Reaction. solid Fe(OH), precipitate here:
FeSO, + NaOH ——> _ Fe(OH), | + NajSO,

156 Chemistry

The precipitate compound is denoted by a bottom-faced arrow mark (| )at its
right.

7.3 Special Types of Chemical Reactions

There are some chemical reactions which do not fall in the redox and non-redox
classifications, Some of them are discussed below:

Hydrolysis Reactions: The chemical reactions. in which water as a reactant
reacts with other compounds and produces some new compounds is called
hydrolysis. Example:

sicl, + Ho os 5i(OH), + 4HCl

Here, SiCl, and H,O are participating in a reaction so it is a hydrolysis reaction.
This kind of reaction sometimes produces non-transparent soluble compounds.
In that case, the reaction may be considered as a precipitation reaction. The
following reaction can be classified as both a hydrolysis reaction and a
precipilation reaction:

Alcl(s) + 3H,00) M——* Al(OH),(s) + 3HClI(aq)

Here, Al(OT1), is non-soluble in water.

Hydration Reaction: One or more molecules of water combine with ionic
compounds during formation of a crystal lattice. This kind of reaction is called a
hydration reaction. Water molecules that combine with ionic compounds is
called lattice water or hydrated water. For example, 5 moles water (5H,O0)
combines with copper sulfate (CuSO,) and produces pentahydrate copper sulfate
(CuSO,.5H,Q).

CuSO, + 5H,0 ——_—"_+ CuSO,.5H,0

Penta hydrated copper sulfate

There are many such reactions:

£023
2025

Chemical Reactions 157

7ns0, 4 7H,0 ——___» Z2n5Q0,.7H,0
Heptahydrate Zinc Sulfate

FeSO, a 7H,O = FeSO4.7H,0
Heptahydrate Ferrous Sulfate

CaCl, + 6H,0 oo CaCl,.6H.0

Hexahydrate Calcium Chloride
MgCl, + 7H,0 ——+ __ MgCl.7H,0

Heptahydrate Magnesium Chloride

A hydration reaction is basically similar to an addition reaction. However, in
addition reactions, there is electron exchange while in hydration, there is none.

Isomerization Reaction: Two compounds with similar molecular formula but
with different properties are called isomers of each other. A chemical reaction in
which atoms in a molecule rearrange themselves to form one isomer from
another isomer is called isomerization. For example, H,N,CO molecular
formula denotes two compounds with varied structural formula: NH,CNO
(ammonium cyanate) and urea (H,N-CO-NH,). They are isomers of each other.
When heat is applied to ammonium cyanate, it produces urea.

Heat
NH,CNO ————+» H,N-CO-NH;

Polymerization Reaction: A large number of molecules of the same compound
combine together to form a large molecule of heavy atomic mass, at high
temperature and pressure and in the presence of a catalyst. This reaction 1s called
polymerization. In such cases, the large molecule is called a polymer and each of
the smaller molecules that combine together are called monomers. Under the
effect of 1200 atm. pressure, 200°C temperature and O, catalyst, numerous
smaller molecules of ethylene combine into a large polymer molecule of
polythene. This reaction is polymerization reaction of ethylene. Here, ethylene
molecules are the monomers while polythene molecule is the polymer. In the
equation, n denotes the number of molecules. fi

Zz

n(CH,=CH,) —_———> (-CH)-CH2-),
200°C, 1200 atm
158 Chemistry

7.4 Examples of a Few Real Life Chemical Reactions

7.4.1 Chemical Reactions in Reality

We observe many happenings around us everyday which are caused by chemical
reactions. Examples:

1. Rust on Iron: We use various instruments made of tron everyday like knife,
scissors, machete etc. If we keep them exposed in open air, they undergo rusting.
Here, iron undergoes reaction with oxygen and water vapor and produces ferric
oxide. Since rust is fragile in nature, oxygen and water vapor from air pass
through it and continue to corrode the iron. Thus the whole object made of iron
is ruined.

2Fe + 1.50, + 3H,0 —————» _ 2Fe(OH),
2Fe(OH), —————+ ___ Fe, 0,.nH,0
Rust

The number of moles of water in rust is not fixed. That is why, the formula of
rust is Fe,0;.nH,0 Here, the value of n can be 1, 2, 3, 4..... ete. integers.

Z. Prevention of Corrosion of Copper and Aluminum: We also use copper-
aluminum products in our day to day life. When products made of Cu and Al
come in touch with open air, they produce a layer of CuO and ALO,. This layer
acts to prevent the air to come in direct contact with Cu and Al and no more
reaction takes place. Thus the decay of Cu and Al is prevented.

3. Relief from the bite of ants and Bee: When ants or bees bite us, we feel pain
at the spot of the bite. We use lime on that spot to get relief from the pain. The
ant in its mouth or the bee in its sting carries an acid which is the cause of our
pain. The lime (base) reacts with that acid and neutralizes it. As a result, we are
relieved of the pain.

2025
2025

Chemical Reactions L59
4, Energy Produced through Respiration: Respiration occurs in every cell of
our body. In respiration, basically, the glucose (C,H,,0,) molecule is oxidized by
Q, and in the process CO,, H,O and energy is produced.

CHy20, + 602

6CO, + 6H,O +Entergy

The digestion system in the human body forms excess HCI in many of us. To
neutralize this acid, many doctors prescribe an antacid type medicine. Antacid is
a mixture of Mg(OH), and Al(OH),. These two bases neutralize excess HC] and
the patient feels relieved. The equation of the reaction 1s:

2HCl + Mg(OH), —— Mel, + 2H,0

3HC] + AN(OH); MH» Alcl, + 3H,0

5. Natural Gas as Fuel: Natural gas is used as fuel. Maximum percentage of
natural gas is composed of methane. When this methane gas is burnt m oxygen,
it produces CO,, H,O and heat. When we burn CNG, diesel, petrol, kerosene and
octane, they produce the same products.

CH, +20, ——————> CO, + 2H,0 + Entergy
7.4.2 Ways of Prevention of Some Harmful Reactions

Many products around us are continuously being decayed or eroded due to some
chemical reactions, We can make use of our knowledge of chemistry to prevent
such decaying and save many of them.

(i) To prevent corrosion of rust on iron, one can paint the outside of the tron
products so that it does not come in contact with air, A coating of a comparatively
less active metal on iron through electrolysis. which is called electroplating, can
also save iron from rusting. The process which lays a coating of zine on other
metals is called galvanizing and the process of tin plating lays a tin coating. The
process which lays a coating of a metal on other metals through electrolysis is
called electroplating. This way we can save metals from corrosion.
160 Chemistry

(ii) The roofs and yards of our houses become slippery during the rainy season.
We spread sand on those slippery spots. The slippery substance is alkaline.
Therefore, it requires some acidic substance to be neutralized. Sand (S10,) is
acidic. This sand neutralizes the alkaline there.

(ili) Sewing needles are kept in coconut oil. The reason is to prevent it from any
reaction with oxygen and water vapor of air and get corroded.

7.5 Rate of Reaction

We know, in any reaction, reactants convert to products. Some reactions take
less than 1 second while, some take quite a lot of time.

The amount of products produced from reactants per unit time is called
the rate of reaction.

Fig 7.03: Reactions with Different Rates. Rust on won, corabustion of candle, Explosion
of bomb.

For example, when AgNO, is added to the NaC] solution, it takes less than |
second to create the white precipitate of AgCl. On the other hand, it takes years
for a bridge to rust. Reactions that take less time have a higher rate of reaction
and reactions that take more time have a lower rate of reaction.

2025
Chemical Reactions 161

Experiment on Rate of Reaction

Take four test tubes and mark them 1, 2. 3, 4. Take an approximate
amount of 0,5 mg sodium carbonate (Na,CO,) or washing soda in each of
them. Then add normal water to tube 1 and 2 and hot water to 3 and 4,
Now add 1 mL lemon juice (citric acid) or vinegar (4-10% acetic acid) to
tube number 2 and 4, Observe the following changes:

eae =
ea

yinegar/ feng juice

Fig 7.04: Reaction between sodium carbonate and acetic acid or vinegar,

1. Which of the test tubes produces gas bubbles?

2. Which of the test tubes does not produce gas bubbles?

3. Which test tube produces the maximum number of gas bubbles?
4. Which test tube produces the minimum number of gas bubbles?

Think: Why does gas come out in a larger amount from one of the tubes
of number 2 and 4?

Forma-21, Chemistry Class-9-10
162 Chemistry

The above experiment tells you all test tubes do not give the same amount of

product at a certain time

7.5.1 Le Chatelier’s Principle

In some reactions products react and turn into reactants again. When the
reactants react and produced a new substance that is called a lorward reaction.
When the products again react and revert back to reactants they are called
backward reactions. At the start of the reaction, the [orward reaction has a higher
rate. It decreases gradually with the progress of time. Again, at the start, the rate
of the backward reaction remains slow bul il increases gradually with the
progress of time, At a stage, both the rates become equal. This state is known as
equilibrium of the reversible reaction.

*

Rate of forward reaction
Rate of both reactions is equal

Rate of backward reaction

time r

Rate of reaction

a

Reactant

equilibrium. concentration
of both reactant and product
are unchanged.

Product

Concentration

lime -

Fig 7.05: Chemical equilibrium.

Both forward and backward reactions continue in equilibrium, the amount of
reactants that have already turned into products in the forward reaction, are equal
to the reactants that have been produced in the backward reaction at this state.
Therefore, it appears that the reaction has stopped but in reality it has not.
However, in equilibrium, if we change the parameters of the reaction such as
temperature, pressure and

Pa
=
a
2025

Chemical Reactions 163

concentration etc. the equilibrium also changes. Increase and decrease of
products in equilibrium of a reversible reaction is controlled by the Le
Chatelier’s principle. The principle is:

At the equilibrium of reversible reactions, if any of the factors (temperature,
pressure and concentration of reactant) is changed, the equilibrium position
will shift in such a way that the effect of factor 1s neutralized,

Explanation of Le Chatelier’s Principle:

The effect of temperature, pressure and concentration of reactants in equilibrium
can be explained by the Le Chatelier’s principle.

Effect of Heat

Let us consider a reversible reaction:

N, + 3H, —— 2NH, + 92 kj]

The forward part of this reaction is exothermic; when reactants N, and H, react
to produce NH, they also evolve heat. Conversely in the backward part, when
NH, converts to N, and H,, it absorbs heat. Therefore, heat is required to be
applied. Now we shall see according to Le Chatellier’s principle, what will
happen as we apply heat to this reversible reaction. According to the principle,
if heat is applied, the effect due to that heat has to be neutralized. Application of
heat will increase the forward reaction, increasing production of heat and that
will not neutralize the heat. If the reverse reaction is increased, that will absorb
more heat and neutralize the excess heat. Therefore, according to Le Chatelier’s
principle, we can say that, if heat is increased, the reverse reaction will also
increase. In other words, the effect of application of heat in exothermic reactions
will drive the equilibrium state to the left side, meaning. NH, converts into N,
and I1,.

In the same way, we can say, decrease of temperature in equilibrium will
increase the exothermic forward reaction and neutralize the effect of lesser heat.
164 Chemistry

The equilibrium will shift from left to nght. Reactions that are not affected by
temperature will not have any effect on its equilibrium too.

Let us consider another reaction:

N2 + 0, + 180 kj — 2NO
Application of heat to this reaction will increase the forward endothermic
reaction or the equilibrium will shift left to right; N, and O, will react and
produce NO. In equilibrium. if heat is decreased, the reverse exothermic reaction

will increase reversing the equilibrium right to left; NO will convert into N, and

0

i
Effect of Pressure

In equilibrium of gaseous reactions, equilibrium of the reaction will change with
the change of pressure. In equilibrium, change of the total number of moles of
reactants and of products will create effect of pressure. Example:

Ng) + 3H{g) ——— > __2NH;(g)

According to Le Chatelier, if pressure is applied, the effect of increased pressure
has to be neutralized. In the same volume, the gas with the greater number of
moles has the greater pressure and the gas with the smaller number of moles has
smaller amount of pressure. In the above reversible reaction, the gaseous
product has the greater number of moles (1+3 =4) whereas the right side has the
smaller number (2). So, to neutralize the effect of increased pressure, the
gaseous substance has to shift from larger number to smaller number. The
forward reaction will increase and N, and H, will produce NH. In other words,
the equilibrium will shift from greater moles to smaller moles. So, if pressure is
decreased at equilibrium, according to the principle, to neutralize the effect of
decreased pressure, the equilibrium state will shifl toward greater moles from
smaller moles.

We can consider another reversible reaction:

N,(g) + 0g) ———— > __2NO(g)

£023
2025

Chemical Reactions 165

Tn this reaction, mole number of reactants is (1+1}) = 2 and mole number of
product is also 2. Since this reaction has no change in the number of moles, there
is no change in pressure too. The reaction does not show any effect of
pressure on its equilibrium,

Effect of Concentration

Equilibrium of all reactions are effected by the concentration of reactants. If in
the equilibrium state of the reaction, the concentration of any reactant is
increased, Le Chatelicr says the concentration of the reactantant has to be
decreased in order to neutralize the effect of increased concentration. Similarly.
if the concentration of any product is increased, the amount of product is
neutralized as the reaction reverts and the concentration of reactants is increased.
That means, the equilibrium shifts toward left.

1. Which of the following acids is present in vinegar?
a. citric acid b, acetic acid
c. tartaric acid d. ascorbic acid

2. Which can be used in the wound of bee stinging?
a. lime b. vinegar
c. table salt d. water

3. What type of reactions occur when antacid medicine is taken?
a, neutralization b. combustion
c. addition d. substitution/displacement
166 Chemistry

4. In the reaction ,S0,+ MgO ——+
i. heat is produced
ii. electron transition occurs
lil. precipitation occurs
Which is correct?
a. b. ii and iii
c. Land ii d.i, and i
5. The reaction 2FeCl, + Cl, > 2Fecl,
1. Isomerization reaction

ii. redox reaction
iii, addition reaction

Which is correct?
aiand i ba and i
c. liand ii d.i, ii and iii

6. What is the oxidation number of Sulfur in H,SO,?

a, +2 b. +4
c. +6 d.+8

1.Both Opu and Setu use natural gas for cooking. Although there are black
shades at the bottom of pans in Opu’s house, there is none on the pans at
Setu’s house.

a. What is irreversible reaction?
b. What is meant by chemical equilibrium?
c. What type of reactions occur during cooking in their houses? Explain.

d. In your opinion, in which of the houses of the stem, gas is wasted during
cooking? Give reasons for your opinion.

2025
2025

Chemical Reactions

Z Pb(NO,),+ 2K1. 3————

The table below is filled up in the light of the above reaction [K= 39,

167

I= 127):
Containes Container) Container Container Total |
Element | 2 Fl 4 | Volume Eccoieetion
used (mL) |
Volume of 0.2 |
Volume of water (mL) 2 | 10 Yellow
Volume of 0.5 M KI (mL) 1 1 |4
'Total volume of solution |
‘of each container . . % 7

a. What is an exothermic reaction?

b. Why aren’t periodic number and valency the same? Discuss

c. What is the total amount of KI used in the period? Determine.

d. Which container will contain more yellow solution? Explain with reasons.

Na+=Cl, ——> Nacl

an + HySO, —— AnSO, + Hy

a. What is an isomerization reaction?

b. What do you understand by a reversible reaction?
c. Determine the oxidation number of sulfur in the product subsiance of the

2c reaction.

d. In the first reaction of the stem, redox- occurs simultaneously. Analyze.
