182 Physics

m,s(75° C—T) = m,s(T — 20° C)

_ (75m, + 20mz)s,. 75 X2+420

= °C = 56.6° C
(m, + m2)s 2+1

Question : A piece of iron of mass 10 gm heated at temperature 120 °C is dropped
into a container of water of mass 1 kg at temperature 30 °C. What will be the
temperature of water?

Answer:

Mass of iron m, = 0.01 kg

Mass of water mz = 1 kg

Specific heat of iron s, = 0.45 x 108 Jkg*K*

Specific heat of water s, = 4.2 x 103 JkgtK?

The amount of heat given up by the piece of iron is equal to the heat gained by the
water. So, the temperature of iron T will be

m4S,(120° C —T) = mps,(T — 30°C)

7 = 120mss, + 30m252 _ 120 x 0.01 x 0.45 x 10? + 30 X1x 4.2 x 103,

™m,S1 + M2S2 0.01 x 0.45 x 103 +1x4.2x 103 C

T = 30.1° C

6.7 Effect of Pressure on Melting Point and Boiling Point

If pressure is applied on a substance, its melting point goes down, for this reason
when pressure is applied, two pieces of ice unite together to form a single piece.
Where pressure is applied on an ice, the melting point decreases there and the ice
melts, after the removal of pressure the melting point again goes back to the previous
value. As a result the water obtained from the fusion of ice again freezes into ice.
Attaching two masses to the ends of a string, if it is placed upon the surface of an ice
bar so that the masses are hanging at the two ends; it will seem that the string has cut
the ice bar into two pieces. But examining the ice we will see that the ice is still a
single piece (Figure 6.09).

2025
2025

Effect of Heat on Matter

183

Boiling point changes due to pressuse. Boiling point decreases if pressure is low,
boiling point increases if pressure is high. This is why those who go to big heights
while mountain climbing, they have to cook something for a long time because due

to low pressure water starts to boil at
comparatively low temperatures. As
temperature can not be increased, so it takes
a longer time to cook. Pressure cookers
have been made for this reason. During
cooking pressure is increased by confining
the vapors inside and for this reason, the
boiling point of water is increased so water
continues to boil at a high temperature. As
the temperature is high, cooking will be
done faster.

If pressure is applied, the melting point of a
gas increases. So without too much cooling,
a gas can be liquefied by increasing

Figure 6.09: It is possible to cut a
ice bar by pressing with a fine wire.

pressure. Then a lot of heat is produced , which has to be taken out properly.

(?) Exercise

General questions

1. When a pot of mercury is heated, the height of mercury decreases first then

increases, Why?

2. Does temperature exist in space where there are no atoms or molecules?

3. Why do we feel cold when we come from a hot, humid and crowded place to an

open area?

4. Why do the drops of water condense on the surface of a glass when a piece of ice

is kept in the glass of water?

5. Why is cooking done faster in a pressure cooker?
184 Physics

© Mathematical questions

. Scientist Celsius introduced a thermometer in which the boiling point of ice was
100° C and the boiling point of water was 0° C! At which temperature the readings
in Celsius and Fahrenheit scales are equal?

2. At which temperature will the density of gold decrease to 0.001% ?

3. The temperature of water increased by 15° C after a piece of hot iron of mass 1
gm at temperature 30° C was put into water of 1 liter. What was the temperature
of the piece of iron?

4. If 10 J heat is supplied per second to a piece of ice of 1gm at temperature 0°C,
how long it takes to vaporize the ice?

5. Ifthe temperature of a gas confined in a closed cylinder is increased from
30°C to 100°C, by what percentage will the pressure of the gas be increased?

\o> . .
Multiple choice questions
P 1

Give tick (v) mark by the side of the correct answer.
1, At the time of construction of a rail line why are small gaps kept in between two
rails?
(a) To save iron.
(b) In summer to increase or to decrease the temperature of the rail line.
(c) To produce knocking sound when the trains run.
(d) To avoid bending of the rails due to its thermal expansion.

2. Why do we feel comfort when wind is blown by fans over our sweating body?
(a) The wind blown by the fan prevents sweat to go out of the body.
(b) Evaporation produces cooling.
(c) The air blown by the fan bears cold water vapors.
(d) The air blown by the fan enters into our body through hair follicles.

2025
Effect of Heat on Matter 185

3. With the help of latent heat ---
i. The temperature of a body increases.
ii. The state of a substance changes.
iii. The internal energy of a body increases.

Which one is correct?
(a) i (b) ii (c) ii & iii (d) i, ii & iii

With the help of the figure answer the question no. 4 & 5

100°C

Temperature
50°C

2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Time (Minute)

Figure 6.10 : Ice melting graph

4. How much time was required to melt all of the ice?
a) 2 min b) 4 min
c) 6 min d) 8 min

3. What is the required time in minutes for the water to reach the boiling
temperature?

a) 6 b) 8
c) 12 d) 18

Forma-24, Physics, Class 9-10
186 Physics

Creative question

1. The distance between two electric poles is 30 m. A copper wire with a length
of 30.001 m was connected to those two pillars on a day when the temperature
was 30°C. The coefficient of linear expansion of copper is 1.67 10°K’. The
wire snapped on a winter day when the temperature of the air was 4° C.

(a) Define triple point of water.

(b) If two bodies have equal amounts of heat, can they be at different
temperatures? Explain.

(c) Express the temperature of air in Fahrenheit scale.

(d) Explain the cause for the wire to snap with mathematical logic.

2. The length of two metal rods is6m.If one rod is heated to increase its
temperature from 30°C to 80°C, its length becomes 6.0051 m after
extension. If another rod is heated to increase its temperature from 20°C to
60°C, its length becomes 6.0041 _m after extension. The co-efficient of
linear expansion is a, the co-efficient of area expansion is 8 and the
co-efficient of volume expansion is ¥.

(a)The exchange of heat between two objects depends on which factors?
(b) Write down why temperature and heat are different?

(c) If the temperature of a metal rod is 80° C, what is it in the Kelvin scale?
(d) Make comments about the material of the two rods with a mathematical
explanation.

2025
2025

Chapter Seven
Waves and Sound

To understand physics perfectly we need have a clear idea about some topics, one of
them is wave. In this chapter we shall limit our discussions to several types of
mechanical waves which are known to us.

Sound is one kind of a wave. In our daily lives, sound plays a very important
role, so we shall discuss sound, velocity of sound, echo and sound pollution in
this chapter.
188

Physics

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

explain the characteristics of waves.

set and measure the simple mathematical relations among the quantities
related to waves.

explain the characteristics of sound waves.

explain creation of an echo.

explain the uses of echo in our daily lives.

set up the mathematical relation among the velocity of sound, frequency,
and wavelength and measure these quantities.

explain the change of velocity of sound.

explain the range of hearing and its uses.

explain the pitch and intensity of sound.

explain the reasons and consequences of sound pollution and the tech
niques to prevent it.

2025
2025

Waves and Sound 189

7.1 Simple Harmonic Motion

By attaching a mass at the lower end of a spring if we release it after pulling, it
will move up-down (In chapter 3 and 4 we have explained this motion). We have
seen that due to friction or other means, energy is lost; and it stops after a while.
Otherwise, it would move up-down for an infinite time. We have also seen that
in simple harmonic motion, the energy of the mass attached to the spring
exchanges between kinetic energy and potential energy. We can assume that the

spring follows Hooke's law. Let’s recall the law: if the spring constant is k and
the position of the end of the spring is at a distance x from its equilibrium
position, then the restoring force Fof the spring is given by:

F = —kx
The harmonic or oscillatory motion that obeys Hooke’s law is called simple
harmonic motion. This is one of the most important motions in physics.

fm
T =22 |—
k

In your book, there is no scope of deducing it, but there is no harm in knowing
it.
If the spring constant of a spring is & and m is the attached mass, then the time

period of the mass is,
l
T=2n f
g

If instead of being a spring, it would be a pendulum and if the length of the

pendulum is / and gravitational acceleration is g, then the time period is:

l
T=22z/-
g

(No, there is no mistake, whether you hang a light mass or a heavy mass,
the time period will be the same, it does not depend on the mass.)
190 Physics

@) Example

Question : Hang a stone of mass 10 gm from a string 1 m long. What is its time

period? 1
Answer: T= an{t =2n as s=2.0s
g 9.8

The time period remains the same whether the mass of the stone is 10 gm or not.
If you wish, by measuring the time period you can determine the value of g just
now. Try and see!

If a mass is attached to the lower end of a spring, the mass will extend the spring
and. This state of the spring is called the equilibrium condition (Figure 7.01-0).

Now we pull the mass downward by a short distance a and release it (Figure
7.01). Then the mass will moving upward, crossing the equilibrium condition, it
will move upward by a distance a. Then again it will be moving downward,
crossing the equilibrium condition, it will come down and this will continue.

3  &
3 = :
3 3
— c
: ) s
Lr v=0 vo
a | , ial Ff vf
TT v=0 v nF v=0 v yen

(0) = (4) (2) (3) (4) (3) (6) (7) (8) (9)

Figure 7.01: (0) is equilibrium condition. After pulling at position (1), the spring is
oscillating in simple harmonic motion when it is released.

When the mass completes the positions 2 — 3 + 4 > 5 and comes to the
position (6) in the same way (moving upward with velocity v) from where it

2025
2025

Waves and Sound 191

started, then we say a complete oscillation has taken place. It has to be
remembered that completing 2 — 3 positions when the mass comes to the

position 4, it will come to the position from where it started, but it is not a
complete oscillation. Because at the first 2 position the mass moves upwards
and at the next 4 position it is moving downwards, therefore it did not come to
the same or initial position in the same manner.

To analyze the simple harmonic motion, it is better to explain some quantities.
The first may be the time period 7. The time required for one complete oscilla-
tion is called the time period. Frequency fis the number of complete oscillations
per second. Therefore, f = : . if time period is expressed in second, then unit of
f will be Hertz (Hz).

In simple harmonic motion, amplitude is the maximum upward (or downward)

distance. The maximum displacement is called amplitude. As shown in figure
7.01, here the amplitude is a.

The next term is phase. When the mass attached to the spring is moving up and
down, if we follow the mass at any instant, we will see that it will stay in a
certain position from the equilibrium; this position is its phase. In simple
harmonic motion this definite condition of the mass and the spring will return
identically just after one time period. In terms of physics, we can say in simple
harmonic motion the phase that develops at any instant, after one time period,
this phase returns again.

7.2 Waves

All of us have seen waves, when a stone is thrown into water then waves spread
out in all directions from that point. When a bulb is switched on in the room, the
light that spreads in the room is also a wave. When we talk, the sound that reach
from one place to another place is also a wave. When a compressed spring is
released, the deformation that propagates through it is a kind of a wave too. In
short, we can say, we can realize what a wave is. But what will we say if we want
to give a nice definition for it in terms of physics?
192 Physics

( If the deviation or disturbance in a quantity changes position with time, ‘\
it is referred to as a wave. A single disturbance can constitute a wave,
while a series of repeated disturbances can also generate a wave; in this
context, it is called a wave train.Generally, the term 'wave' refers to peri-
odic wave trains, while single disturbances are less commonly referred

\__ to by this term. y,

Some waves require a medium to propagate, while others do not. Waves that
need a gaseous, liquid, or solid medium to travel through are known as mechan-
ical waves. In these types of waves, the particles of the medium actively partici-
pate in the wave propagation.

When a stone is thrown into a pond, a single wave is created that spreads
outward through the water. When the vibrations of a tuning fork travel through
a medium—whether air, liquid, or solid—we describe this as a sound wave
propagating through the medium. When the oscillations of electric and magnet-
ic fields transfer energy, this is called an electromagnetic wave. Examples of
electromagnetic waves include light waves, gamma rays, and microwaves.
These types of waves do not require a medium to propagate.

7.2.1 Characteristics of Waves

Here, we will discuss some properties of waves. The first property below (i)
applies only to mechanical waves, while the remaining properties (ii-v) apply to
almost all types of waves.

(i) When a wave propagates through a medium, the particles of the medium
oscillate (vibrate or go up-down) about its own position but are not
displaced permanently with the wave.

2025
Waves and Sound

\ vp

(a) f\ Vr

eV

_
(b) avf/\ OVS

Figure 7.02: A wave is reflecting and
refracting through a wire of different cross
section. (a) When it travels from a thin wire
to a thick wire one type of reflection occurs
(b) When it travels from a thick wire to a
narrow wire another type of reflection occurs

193

Gi) Energy can be transferred from
one place to another through waves.
The more the energy, the more the
amplitude of the wave. Energy is
proportional to the amplitude of the
wave. If the amplitude is doubled,
energy is increased four times.

(iii) Every wave has a velocity; this
velocity depends on the nature of the
medium. In air, the velocity of sound
is 330 m/s, in water this velocity is
1493 m/s ! The velocity of a wave in
a tight rope (under tension) will be
more than the velocity of the wave in
a loose rope.

(iv) Reflection or refraction occurs for waves, it is discussed elaborately for
light, in the next chapter. At present you know that at the time of travelling from
one medium to another medium, if part of a wave returns back to the first
medium, it is called reflection (Figure7.02). When a wave travels from the first

medium to the second, it is refraction.

When we hear an echo of sound, it

reflection. If we hear external sound when
we are submerged under water it is due to

refraction of sound.

(v) Among all the characteristics of waves,
the most important is superposition, even
though this is not observed often by our eyes
in our daily lives. Let us consider that two
waves coming from two different places
reache one place. When one wave is positive
another wave is then negative what happens

is

>" ?

Sepp
eh

then? These are the subjects of superposition,
which will give you a deep insight into Figure 7.03: Addition of two

waves, and you will be able

be waves can create a large wave, one

understand it very clearly. At present, can even cancel the other.

Forma-25, Physics, Class 9-10
194 Physics

only two easy matters are shown in figure 7.03. The two waves, can reinforce
one another or can destroy each other.

@) Do Yourself

/ Pour some water on a big plate in a bright place. Make sure that there is \
no vibration on the plate. If you touch any point of the water, the wave
will spread around from that point and at the bottom of the plate you will
see its shadow or reflections. Touching just the centre of the water of the
plate, you will see a wave starting from the centre and spreading to the
edge of the plate and again returning to the centre after reflection from
there. If the wave can be created properly, meeting at the centre it will
again spread around. If you try a little bit, you can measure the velocity
of this wave. Try and see.

What will happen if you touch a little further from the centre? Try and
see.

7.2.2 Types of Waves

Figure 7.04: Sound is a longitudinal wave of compression and rarefaction
created by the pressure in air. Here A is the wavelength

2025
2025

Waves and Sound 195

When a wave propagates through a spring, the wave moves forward by
contraction and expansion of the spring. Again by shaking one end of a rope a
wave can be formed and can be sent through the rope. There is a fundamental
difference between the two waves. The wave formed in the spring was of
contraction and expansion, the direction of contraction and expansion of the
spring and the direction of wave is the same. The name of this wave is longitudi-
nal wave. Sound (Figure 7.04) is this type of a longitudinal wave.

1. Make a photocopy of this 3. Now put the rectangular paper
and cut it as a circle, on the circular paper and enter a
small pin through the cros mark (x)

+)
2. Make a void by cutting along 4. Now rotate the circular paper upwords
the middle of the paper as shown as shown in the picture.

in the above picture.

Figure 7.05: Model of how longitudinal wave advances.
196 Physics

When we produce a wave in the rope by shaking it, there the vibration of the
rope does not take place along the direction of the velocity of the wave. The
direction of vibration i.c. up and down of the rope, is perpendicular to the
direction of the velocity of the wave. The name of this type of a wave is a
transverse wave. The wave produced in water is an example.

@) Do Yourself

( Vrake a photocopy of figure 7.05. Now cut it shown as in the figure.
Observe that a small window is made on the rectangular paper below.
Now put the rectangular paper on the circular paper. Now enter a small
wire or pin through the cross (x) mark and fold the wire by pressing it.
Now rotate the circular paper below and see through the cut portion,
clearly you will see how longitudinal waves advance. y

7.2.3 Wave related quantities

The quantities we have talked about in simple harmonic motion, actually all of
them can be used in case of waves. In a wave complete oscillation occurs, it has
a time period, frequency and amplitude. We have seen that when a wave
propagates, if we look at a particular particle of a medium, we will see that the
particle is executing simple harmonic oscillation!

In case of wave we can talk about two new quantities, one of them is the
wavelength. Wavelength is the distance from any phase of the wave to the next
identical phase (Figure 7.04). Therefore, the distance travelled by a wave in one
time period is the wavelength.

In waves there is a second quantity which is not present in simple harmonic
vibration, this is wave velocity. The distance travelled by a wave in one second
is called the wave velocity. The number of time periods present in one second is
the frequency, if the frequency is fand wavelength is 2, then the velocity can be

expressed as,
va=fa

When a wave travels from one medium to another medium, then change of its
velocity occurs. Since the frequency always remains the same, so when a wave

2025
2025

Waves and Sound

197

travels from one medium to another then its wavelength changes. Therefore,
when waves propagate through different medium, its velocity or wavelength
changes, but frequency or time period never changes.

Example

Question: In figure 7.06 a wave is
shown. Among the wave’s amplitude,
wavelength, time period, frequency and
velocity which magnitude can be
determined from the figure? Determine
them.

Answer: From the information that is
given in the figure, only amplitude (0.1
m) and wavelength (2 m) of the wave
can be determined. It is not possible to
determine time period, frequency or
velocity from the information that are

So
i

\ JN
MM

position (m)

displacement(m)
[=
o

Figure 7.06 : A wave with respect
to position

given in the figure! The wave shown above is the condition of the wave at a
particular time. Here there is no information how the position changes with time.

Question: In figure 7.07 another wave is shown. Among the wave’s amplitude,
wavelength, time period, frequency and velocity which magnitude can be
determined from this figure? Determine them.

_ 0.2
: [\ _
5 0

a | | |
3 | }
Gi. - 0.2 | |
3 1 2 3 4

time (s)
Figure 7.07: A wave with respect to time

The amplitude (0.2 m) and time
period (2 s) of this wave can be
determined; from this figure other
information cannot be determined.
How the wave changes with time at
a particular position is shown in the
figure. So, it is not possible to
determine the wavelength.
198 Physics

Question: Figure 7.08 shows a wave at a particular time in different position and
for a particular positions in different times. Determine its amplitude,
wavelength, time period, frequency, and velocity.

Answer: From the first figure we see that, the wave has,
Amplitude, a = 0.1m
Wavelength, 24 = 1m

From the second figure we see that, the wave has,

Amplitude, a = 0.1 m (we know it from the first figure also)
Time period, T = 0.2 s
We can calculate frequency f from the time period,

~-titicy
f= Fog 70H

=)

m
o
=

7
Mie

03 0.4

n
WAY,

15 2.0

=i
=

displacément(m)
So

S
na

displacement(m)
Se

position (m) time (s)

Figure 7.08: A wave with respect to position and time simultaneously

Therefore, using the information of the two figures, we can say

v=Af=1mx5 Hz=5 m/s

Question: In figure 7.09 a wave is shown, where A, B, C, D and E is markedas
different positions. At which positions are the phases equal?
Answer: At A and C, phases are equal.

At A and B, though the amplitudes are equal their phases are opposite.
At D and E, though they are equal, phases are not equal.

2025
2025

Waves and Sound 199

A B CODE

Figure 7.09: Phase of a wave at different position

7.3 Sound Wave

To produce sound waves a source is needed, a medium to send it through, and
any type of receiver to receive that sound. There are many sources of sound
around us. Obviously, the most familiar source is our throat; sound is created by
the vibration of the vocal cord when air flows through it in our throat. We will
feel the vibration if we touch our throat during conversation.

Certainly you have noticed that the voice of a male is deep and the voice of
female and children is sharp. When we make a sound then air comes out through
throat from our lungs. In our throat there is a wind pipe through which air enters
the lungs and come out from the lungs. To produce sound larynx is situated upon
it. There are two membranes which work as valves, called the vocal cords.
These vibrate during the flow of air and produce sound. The vocal cords of
males become stiff with the increasing of age, whereas for females it remains
soft. This is why males produce sound of low frequency and females produce
sound of high frequency. Due to this, the voice of males is deep and that of the
females is high pitched.

@) Do Yourself

Cut a piece of paper as shown in Figure 7.10. Placing it between the two
fingers, blow, keeping it on your mouth. The two pieces of paper will vibrate
like vocal cords of the larynx and produce a sound. Cut the paper in different
ways and try to produce different kinds of sounds.

200

Besides throat, sound can be

produced by vibrating the

diaphragm. When you hit your
school bell it starts vibrating and
sound is produced. If you grip the
bell then the vibration will stop and
the sound will stop instantly. After
producing sound by vibration, we

Physics

thin

need a medium to transmit it from Figure 7.10: Sound can be produced by
one place to another. Sound can preparing vocal cord using paper and
also be sent through liquids blowing it.

and solids but we are used to hearing sound using air as a medium. To show
that sound cannot propagate without a medium, we keep a calling bell as

Figure 7.11: The sound of the
calling bell will not be listen if
it is evacuated gradually by a

pump.

shown in Figure 7.11 in the laboratory. The
calling bell can be sounded by supplying
electricity from outside. The sound of the
calling bell will be slowly dulled if it is
evacuated gradually by a pump. If the bell jar is
completely emptied of air, though the bell will
vibrate inside but it seems from outside that
there is no sound.

We can hear sound with our ears. The sound
that can be heard has frequency between 20 Hz
to 20,000 Hz or 20 kHz. (Usually hearing
capability decreases due to continuously
listening to songs with head phones or staying
in sound polluted areas.) If the frequency of
sound is less than 20 Hz, it is called infrasound,
and if the frequency of sound is greater than 20
kHz it is called ultrasound. If frequency less
than 20 Hz or greater than 20

2025
Waves and Sound 201

kHz is generated, then the movement created in air will not be heard by us. To
detect such sounds we can use a special type of microphone or receiver. Many
animals can hear sounds of low frequency. Before earthquakes, sounds
of low frequency are generated, and
often hearing this sound animals panic
and leave the area.

Characteristics of sound wave
Sound is a mechanical wave, because

sound wave is produced due to the
vibration of body, and for its transmission
an elastic medium is needed. This isa ps gure 7.12: “Phone” can be made
longitudinal wave, because the direction of by tying thread behind the plastic
propagation of the wave and the direction glass.

of vibration is the same. The velocity of

sound depends on the property of the medium. In gaseous mediums its velocity
is low, in liquids greater, and in solids it is much more. The velocity of sounds
depends on the temperature and humidity of the medium. The intensity of sound
is proportional to the square of the amplitude of the wave. Therefore, if the
amplitude of a wave is high, the intensity of the sound will be high and if the
amplitude is low, the intensity will be low.

@) Do Yourself:

(Ta ake two plastic glasses. Make two small holes on the bottom of the glasses \
with a hot safety pin. Put thread through this hole and tie the thread inside
the cup (Figure 7.12). Tie the two plastic glasses with long thread. One
person should hold one cup and another should hold the second cup. One of
you speaks, and the other person listens. (Keep the thread stretched,
otherwise sound cannot be heard.) We are so used to hearing words in air;
we think that sound goes only in air. This experiment is the proof that sound
\on propagate through liquids or solids like other medium too. /

Forma-26, Physics, Class 9-10
202 Physics

Example

Question: Sound of frequency 1 kHz is produced by a tuning fork. It was
allowed to pass through air, water and iron. It was found that the velocity

of sound in air is 334 m/s, in water is 1493 m/s and in iron 5130 m/s. What
are the wavelengths in these mediums?

Answer:
Velocity of sound= Af, here A is the wavelength, and f is the frequency.
Here frequency is 1 kHz or 1000 Hz.

A=

“ALS

-1
Inair, A=-“™ =0,334m

~ 103571

1493 m—

1
— «=149m

In water, A=

_ 5130 m7
~ 403571

1
Iniron, A =5.13m

7.3.1 Echo

Since sound is one type of wave, it can have reflection. If someone speaks in a
big empty building it creates a reverberating sound, which is known as ‘Echo’.
This is due to reflection. Within the building the distance is not enough to
hear the sound separately. When we hear something the feeling persist for
around 0.1 s, so to hear two sounds separately, it needs separation of 0.1s
differences between two sounds.Velocity of sound is 330 m/s, therefore to create
a difference of 0.1 s, sound has to travel at least 33 m.

If we stand in front of a big wall, a building, or a high hill at least half of this
distance (16.5 m), the sound will take 0.1 s to come back after being reflected
and we will hear the reflection of sound or echo.

2025
Q
S
AQ

Waves and Sound 203

Bats have eyes and pretty good eye sight, yet they use echo during flight.

While flying a bat uses its throat to produce sound, if there is an obstacle in the front,
the sound returns after reflection, and the bat can estimate the distance from the
time of the returning sound. For this reason, the bat can fly even in dark
without being obstructed. We cannot hear the sound produced by the bat;
because the sound is ultrasound i.e. frequency of the sound is beyond our
hearing range. Bats can produce sound of frequency 100 kHz or more.

7.3.2 Variation of Velocity of Sound Table 7.0: velocity of sound
In air, velocity of sound is proportional to the in different medium
square root of temperature. i.e. Medium | m/s
v«vT Air 330
Here the temperature is not Celsius temperature. Hydrogen | 1,284
Temperature in the Kelvin scale. Mercury | 1,450
The velocity of sound does not depend on the air Water | 1,493
pressure. But it is inversely proportional to the Tron | 5,130
square root of the density of air. So if there is water Diamond | 12,000

vapor in the air, its density decreases, hence velocity increases.

Sound is a mechanical wave. It depends on the elasticity of the medium. The
nature of liquid and solid is different from air and naturally the velocity of sound
is different there. In liquid the velocity of sound is more than that in air and in
solid velocity of sound is even more than in liquid.

@) Do Yourself

Put your ear at one end of a table, tell someone to knock at the other end.
You will hear the sound of the knock clearly, because solid substances
are much better medium for sound than air.

Example

Question: At a certain place, the temperature in the winter is 10°C and velocity
of sound is 332 m/s, if the temperature is raised to 30°C in the summer what is
the velocity of sound?

204 Physics

Answer: vot
Mw Ty
V2 7 Tp
_ Ty = 332 273 + 30 = 3435
M1 V2 | 273 + 10 M/S = 343.5 m/s

7.3.3 Uses of Sound

We need not talk much about the common uses of sound. We speak, listen to
songs, doctors hear the heart beat, engineers hear the sound of instruments etc.
There are other applications of sound, which you may not have heard about.
Previously we could not see from outside the fetus that grows in the womb of a
pregnant mother; which is now possible with the help of a process called
ultrasonography.

Three dimensional Seismic Surveys
Seismic Survey is done to explore
whether gas or oil is present below
the earth. To do this, a small blast is
done a little below the earth. Sound
of the blast hits the different layers
of the soil and returns after
reflection. The reflected wave is —
detected by a special type of
receiver named a geophone (Figure
7.13). Analyzing all information a
perfect three dimensional picture of
the soil is formed, from which gas Figure 7.13: Information about different
or oil is present or not is _ layers of the earth can be known, by the

determined. Since we know the reflection of sound.
position of the source of sound and the geophone, the distance of the different
layers of soil can be calculated accurately from the time required for the sound

to reach from source to geophone.

Q
S
N
2025

Waves and Sound 205

Ultrasound cleaner

Ultrasound cleaner is used when we need to clean small instruments perfectly in
the laboratory. The small instruments are immersed in a liquid, and subjected to
the ultrasound wave, the vibrations of which remove the dirt.

7.3.4 Musical Sound

We hear different kinds of sound, some

of these sounds are sweet and some of —viojin (eee ae Ae ee

them are annoying. The sweet sounds
are the sounds of musical instruments. In T¥™pPet ' ' \ \ \
figure 7.14 the waves of sound of some Flute App py
musical instrument are shown. You can
see that all of them are periodic Flute) \IW yyy)

vibrations. In a tuning fork a perfect ~ |2ms| time
vibration is created. But in a musical Figure 7.14: The sound waves of
sound there is not only a single wave, different musical instrument.

many waves superpose on one another to
make the sound melodious.

Different types of musical instruments that are used to produce melodious
sound, can be divided into three groups:

Musical instrument made of wire: Ektara (Monochord), Violin, Sitar
Musical instruments based on air flow: Flute, Harmonium
Musical instrument made of percussion: Dhol, Tabla

Now-a-days melodious sounds are produced using electronics in a completely
different way.
206 Physics

7.3.5 Sound Pollution

Sound is essential in our life, but excessive sound makes our life intolerable.

Those who live in cities, especially those who live besides a road observe
that the sound produced from engines of

bus, car, truck and of continuous horns
goes beyond our tolerance limit very

Table 7.02: Intensity of sound of different types

often. Most of the time we are used to |Jet engine 110-140 dB
living in such types of pollution for a Traffic 80-90 dB
long time. If we are fortunate enough to Car 60-80 dB
go to a quiet place where there is no Television 50-60 dB
sound pollution then suddenly we can Conversation 40-60 dB
realize the importance of life without | Breathing 10 dB
sound pollution. The intensity of | S°umdofmosquito | 0 dB

wings

different types of sound are shown in
Table 7.02.

Due to sound pollution, we are losing our hearing capability. To intensify the
problem many of us listen to songs using headphones in the ears.

To reduce sound pollution the first step is to make laws against it. The second
step is to make public awareness. This issue has to be clarified to all, using horns
while in cars as little as possible, installation of sound absorbing machine in the
industry, making less uses of loud speaker, using vehicles of less sound etc. In
addition, steps be taken of plantation of trees in the empty places in cities.

2025
2025

Waves and Sound 207

(?) Exercise

Genarel question

1.
2.
3.

Show that a wave can transfer energy from one place to another.
Why is sound produced in whistle?

“When a wave propagates, the medium does not flow. It executes
simple harmonic oscillation about its position”, True or False?

Why is sound produced in a thunderstorm?

What problem would arise for a bat if it creates infra-sound instead of
ultra- sound when flying?

Mathematical questions

amplitude (m)

0.1 ] ] — Ol ]
[\ [\ ? [\
YQ
o —. 3 0
VM} bal M
-O.14 E 0.1
2 3 4 0.05 0.10 015 0.20
position (m) time (s)

Figure 7.15: A wave with respect to time and position

A wave is shown in Figure 7.15 with respect to time and position. What
is the velocity of the wave?

The ratio of velocity and of an object ina medium velocity of sound
in that medium iscalled MACH. What is the velocity of the fighter plane
MACH 9?

In summer, the velocity of sound is increased by 0.5 % in a town. If the
temperature in winter is 10°C, what is the temperature in the summer?
208 Physics

4. We can hear sound from 20 Hz to 20 kHz. What are the wavelengths of
sounds of 20 Hz and 20 kHz?

Multiple choice questions
P 1

Put tick (vy) mark on the correct answer
1. What type of wave is sound?
(a) Transverse wave (b) Electromagnetic wave
(c) Longitudinal wave (d) Radio wave
2. In which medium is the velocity of sound maximum?
(a) Solid (b) Liquid
(c) Gaseous (d) Plasma
3. Why is a dead bat seen hanging from an electric line?

(i) Bats are attracted by the induced electric field caused by the current carrying
lines.

(ii) It did not hear the echo of ultrasonic sound ahead. =>
(iii) It is hanging with one wire and touching the other. 20m
Which one of the following is correct?
(a) i and ii (b) i and iti A B
(c)iiandiii (d)i, ii and iii h= 10 m|
Figure 7.16

In Figure 7.16, S is a source of sound and AB is the surface of water. Answer
questions 4 and 5 on the basis of the given information and the figure
considering the velocity of sound as 332 m/s .

2025
Waves and Sound 209

4. What will be the maximum height of water to hear the echo?
(a) 13.40cm (b) 13.40m
(c) 3.40m (d) 3.40cm

5. How much time is required to hear the echo in case of the given figure?
(a) 0.10s (b) 0.12 s
(c) 0.14s (d) 0.18 s

Creative questions

1. Rafsan is taking his test examination of class ten. His physics exam is on the
next day. There is a marriage ceremony in their neighboring house. The music
was played loudly there till 2 am at night. This loud music hampers his studies
very much. His father is a patient of high blood pressure. It is also
uncomfortable for him.

(a) What is sound pollution?

(b) Explain the causes of sound pollution.

(c) What troubles may Rafsan’s father face due to sound pollution? Write

down the effects of sound pollution on public health.
(d) What measures can be taken to prevent sound pollution?

2. Using the information given
below and based on Figure 7.17

answer the following questions. Frequency of sound = 1200 Hz NWN

Air temperature = 30°c
N)

(a) What is periodic motion?
(b) Why is water wave a

transverse wave? Explain. s
(c) Find the wavelength of sound. °
(d) Is it possible to hear echo at

position S? Verify the

mathematical logic.

Forma-27, Physics, Class 9-10
210 Physics

3. During summer vacation, Nusrat visited Sajek with her family. To hear an
echo she screamed loudly beside a hill. But, hearing no echo, she felt sad. Then
her father told Nusrat to move 3 m and to make a sound. This time Nusrat heard
the echo. On that day, the velocity and frequency of sound was 332 m/s and
1328 Hz.

(a) What is an echo?

(b) Why is a minimum distance necessary to hear an echo?

(c) What is the wavelength of sound produced by Nusrat?

(d) How far does Nusrat have to move backward if she wants to hear an

echo after 0.3 s of screaming?

2025
