Chapter Eight

Chemistry and Energy

In Chapter 7, we saw that most reactions release heat. For example, we cook,

drive vehicles by burning wood, coal, natural gas. That is, heat is released in this

case. The question is, where does this heat come from? Every chemical sub-

stancé contains a type of energy that transforms into heat energy during reac-

tions. This inherent energy of matter is called chemical energy. How does

this energy prevail in the substances? The battery produces electricity which

lights up the torch. Burning mineral oil produces heat which is then converted to
electricity. Many countries are using the atomic energy to produce electricity.
Chemistry or chemical reaction or nuclear reaction is involved in all these.
However, these reactions also have some adverse eflects on us too. This chapter
will discuss all these things.

2023
Chemistry and Energy 169

+ explain the relation of producing energy with chemical changes.
* realize the importance of purity of fuel in energy production; limit the

consumption of these fuel for saving the environment and show
consciousness in selection of appropriate fuels.

* find out chemical reactions related problems and prepare an investigation
plan, implementation and test its effectiveness keeping the safety
measures in mind.

* take decision responsibly and spontaneously with confidence in
performing chemical reactions and in producing energy.

* explain the idea of direct current using the electronic concept of
oxidation-reduction reactions.

* describe the process of producing electricity by chemical reactions.

* carry out the reactions using electricity.

* present an opinion on the products of electrolysis of different substances
and their commercial use.

* construct the electrodes of galvanic cells.

* differentiate between an electrolytic cell and a galvanic cell.

* explain the application of an electrochemical cell.

* give an opinion on nuclear electricity production after a relative analysis.

* carry out experiments of exothermic and endothermic reactions.

* show consciousness on the worse effects of chemical reactions.

* show interest on using pure fuel.

* show the change of heat on dissolving salts during chemical changes
through experiments.

Forma-22, Chemistry Class-9-10
170 Chemistry

8.1 Chemical Energy

8.1.1 Source of Chemical Energy

Matter has molecules and atoms. An atom remains connected to another atom
because of attraction energy (bond). The energy by which atoms are connected
to each other is called chemical energy.

Bond Energy

In a chemical bond, the energy by which an atom remains joined with another
atom is called bond energy. In sodium chloride, there is an ionic bond between a
sodium ion and a chloride ton. There is a covalent bond between carbon and
oxygen in carbon dioxide. In iron, one atom is bonded with another due to a
metallic bond. The energy that acts here in these cases to maintain the bonds is
the bond energy.

Inter Molecular Energy

In a covalent compound, the energy that keeps the molecules combined with
each other is called the inter molecular energy. For example, water is a covalent
compound, Inter molecular energy combines the molecules of surrounding water
with a molecule of water. On the other hand, in the ionic compound sodium
chloride, 06 chloride ions surround a sodium ion. There is energy active in
between them. Again, each chloride ton is surrounded by 06 sodium ions. They
are also combined due to the energy.

The attraction energy in between ions of an ionic compound is stronger than inter
molecular energy present between covalent molecules. That is why the melting
point and boiling point of ionic compounds is greater than those of covalent
bond substances.

Due to the same reason, ionic compounds remain as solids at room temperature
whereas covalent compounds usually remain in liquid or gaseous siate al room
temperature. However, there are some exceptions like naphthalenes, Even
though it is a covalent compound, it remains solid in room temperature.

The inter molecular energy in a covalent compound consisting of atoms of two
elements (FCI) is greater than inter molecular energy in a covalent compound
consisting of atoms of the same element (I1,).

20235
2025

Chemistry and Energy 171

Transformation of Energy in Chemical Reactions

Each substance contains some energy. Usually in chemical reactions, the energy
of the reactants is necessary to make the reactions happen or some chemical
reactions result in generation of energy. That means, energy is transformed in
chemical reactions. The energy required to make a reaction take place or the
resultant energy ftom a reaction may have different forms like heat energy, light
energy, electricity, sound ete.

Units of Measurement of Energy

Earlier, calorie or kilocalorie was used as unit to measure energy. The heat
applied to raise the temperature of | gram water by 1°C is called a calorie (cal in
brief). 1 kilocalorie is 1 thousand calories. Kilocalorie is expressed by keal.

Presently, the international standard unit to measure all kinds of energy is Joule.
A joule is the work done by a force of one newton acting through one metre
displacement. It is expressed by the abbreviate j. 1 kilojoule (kJ) is equal to 1000
joule.

The relation between calorie and joule is 1 cal=4.18 J.

$.1.2 Classification of Chemical Reactions According to Change of Heat

Some reactions occur spontaneously while some reactions require the applica-
tion of energy. Reactions that occur spontaneously heat is produced during the
conversion of reactants to products. According to the change of heat, reactions

are of twokinds: (i) Exothermic reactions and (ii) Endothermic reactions. In
exothermic reactions, the yalue of AH is negative and in endothermic reactions,
the value is positive.

Any substance has a specific energy at a specific temperature. This energy is
called internal energy. If we express the total mternal energy of reactants in a
reaction with E, and the total energy of the products with E,, then the change of
heat energy in that reaction is:

AH = Total internal energy of the products (E,)
- Total internal energy of the reactants (E,}

172 Chemistry

In exothermic reactions, the total
internal energy of reactants (E,) 1s
greater than the total internal energy of
products (E.). Therefore, the value of
AH=(E,-E,) becomes negative,

Heat evolved Heat absorbed

>> 3
%

For example, when in a reaction, the
total internal energy of reactants 50
kJ/mol and the total internal energy of Fig 8.01: Exothennic and Endothermic process,
products is 20 kI/mol, AH = (20-50)

= -30 kJ/mol.

Again, in endothermic reactions, the total internal energy of reactants is lesser
than the total internal energy of products. Therefore, the value of AH= E,-E, in
this case is positive. For example, when in a reaction, the total internal energy of
reactants 70 kJ/mol and the total internal energy of products is 80 kJ/mol,
AH = (80-70) =+10 kJ/mol.

Exothermic Reactions

The chemical reactions in which heat is evolved are called exothermic reactions.
An equation of an exothermic reaction can be written with the word Heat at the
right side. If it is written with the expression AH, the value will be negative (-).
You have seen the natural gas burnt while cooking, produces heat. If water is
poured on dry lime, that substance becomes hotter. Methane is the basic
ingredient of cooking gas. When we burn this gas, each mole of it reacts with
oxygen of air and produces carbon dioxide, water and 890 kT heat.

CH,(g) + 20,(¢) ————» COle) + 2H,O0(g) + 890 kj/mol
Methane Oxygen Carbon dioxide Water Heat
On,

CHylg) +: 20,(¢) _—F CO(g) + 2H,0(g) : AH = —890 k]/mol

£023

Methane Oxygen Carbon dioxide Water Heat
2025

Chemistry and Energy 173

Again, dry lime is calcium oxide (CaO). When water is poured in it, calcium
hydroxide Ca (OH), is produced. Alongside, 63.95 kJ/mol heat is produced.
That’s the reason of it being heated.

CaO(s) + 2H,0(1) t——®» Ca(OH),(ag) + 63.95 kj/mol
Caleium Oxide Water Calcium hydroxide heat
Or,
Cao(s) + 28,00) ———» Ca(OH),(aq) ; AH = -63.95 kj/mol
Calcium Oxide Water Calcium hydroxide heat
In both the above reactions, the total internal energy of reactants (E,) is greater

than the total internal energy of products (E,). That extra energy has evolved as
heat in the reaction.

Endothermic Reactions

Chemical reactions in which heat is absorbed

are called endothermic reactions. They are
also called heat absorbing reactions. In the sciiaiaiaiiaiaied” aie
equation of endothermic reactions. on the
left side, the head may be recorded. If it is
written with the expression AH, the value
will be positive (+). In villages, the outer
shells of snails or oysters are gathered and
burnt to produce edible lime. Actually, these
casts contain about 98% calcium carbonate.
The heat from the fire transforms this calci-
um carbonate into calcium oxide and carbon 8.02: Preparation of lime from
dioxide. The calcium oxide is lime which Oysters,
remains as left over and the carbon dioxide

mixes in the air,
174 Chemistry

cacO ss) + 176.8 kJ/mole t——® Ca0(s) + CO,(g)
Calcium carbonate heat calcium oxide carbon dioxide
Or,

CaCO.(s) —_\-+ caO(s) + CO.(g) : AH= 176.8 kJ/mole

8.1.3 Calculation of Heat Change in Chemical Reactions Using the Bond
Energy

The value of AH in a chemical reaction is determined in two ways. We have just
seen one in the above discussion. In the other, it is determined using the bond
energy- deduce the total bond energy of products from the total bond energy of
the reactants. The result in both the ways 1s the same.

The energy required to break the bonds of the atoms of a compound and separate
them is called the bond energy. Again, the energy required to form the bonds of
atoms of a compound and combine them is called the bond energy.

During chemical reaction, breaking the bonds of reactants and formation of new
bonds of products take place. Energy is needed to break the bonds and energy is
released in bond formation,

In any reaction, if the total bond energy of reactants is B Ls and the total bond
energy of products is B,, then the heat change in that reaction is:

4 AH =The total bond energy of reactants (B,) )
— The total bond energy of products(B;)

= Total energy required for breaking the old bonds (B,)

—Total energy released in the formation of new bonds(B,)

\ y,

2025
2025

Chemistry and Energy 175

In exothermic reactions, the value of B, is lesser than B,, so the value of AH is
negative while in endothermic reactions, the value of B, is greater than B,. so the
value of AH is positive.

Table 8.01: Bond and Bond Energy

Bond Ener Bond Ener
Bond’ | dermal | | Bond (k}/mol) e
C-H 414 N-H 39]
c-Cl 326 0-H 464

c-c 344 O=0 A498
Cat 615 =o $12
N=N 946 cl-cl 244
Br-Br 193 I-I 151
0-0 143 H-H 436
H-cl 43] H-Br 366

H-I 299 H-F 563

c=0 724 c-O 350

When the table says, the bond energy of O=O js 498 kJ/mol, we understand, 498
kilojoule heat is required to break an O=O bond. On the other hand, the
formation of an O-O bond evolves 498 kilojoule heat.

Problem: Determine the heat change in the reaction CH,+ Cl,-
CHCl + HCl. Given, bond energy of C-H = 414 kJ/mol, bond energy of C-Cl
= 244 kJ/mol and bond energy of H-Cl = 431 kJ/mol,

Solution: In the reaction CHy+ Cl, ~ CH,€1+ HCl 1 mole C-H bond
and | mole Cl-Cl bond has been broken among the reactants while | mole H-
Cl bond and | mole C-Cl bond has been formed. Therefore,

Total bond energy applied on reactants to break bonds = (414 + 244) kJ = 658
kJ
176 Chemistry

Total bond energy evolved from products to form bonds = (326 + 431) kJ =
757 kJ

The heat change in the reaction AH = (658 — 757)k] = —99 kJ

Since the value of AH is negative here, so the reaction is exothermic, This
reaction evolves 99 kJ/mol heat.

8.2 Uses of Chemical Energy

$8.2 Uses of Chemical Energy

We can transform the chemical energy into different energies and put that to our
use.

8.2.1 Transformation of chemical energy into different types of energy

Chemical energy can transform into any type of energy like heat, light,
electricity, sound or mechanical energy. Some examples are discussed below.

Burning of Fuel

We get heat and light energy when we burn coal, natural gas, wood etc. This
energy is obtained basically from the chemical energy present in these
substances. Burning is actually to let a substance react with the oxygen of air.
Methane (CH,) is the main ingredient of natural gas. When methane is burnt, it
produces carbon dioxide, water vapor, heat and light.

Fireworks

The fireworks that you see on the sky during large festivals render ight, sound
and mechanical energy. The chemical elements inside the fireworks react with
each other and the chemical energy in them produces light, sound and mechani-
cal energy.

Dry Cell

You are familiar with battery. The batteries used in torches and remotes are dry
cells. The chemical ingredients inside a dry cell react with each other and the
chemical enerey is transformed into electricity.

2025
Chemistry and Energy 177

Daniel Cell

The batteries you see on buses, trucks etc, are Daniel cells. Zinc metallic sticks
in zine sulfate salt solution and copper metallic sticks in copper sulfate salt
solution are used to make Daniel cells. The following reaction takes place in this
cell:

Zn(s) + CuSO,{aq) ——® ZnSO, (aq) + Cu(s)

This reaction turns the chemical energy into electricity.

8.2.2 Chemical Energy and Use of Various Energies Obtained from
Chemical Energy

Chemical energy remains stored in molecules and atoms of elements. When a
substance reacts with another, then we get chemical energy. We turn thal energy
into various energies and put them to use. Chemical energy is the most used of
all kinds of energies on earth.

When wood or natural gas 1s burnt for cooking, their chemical energy turns into
heat energy. The heat obtained from burning wood is used for making bricks or
making earthen pots. Iron, steel and ceramic industries require huge amount of
heat. Coal, petroleum, natural gas etc. mineral fuels are used in heat engines.
These fuels are burnt in the burning chamber to produce heat and the heat is then
turned into mechanical energy to run automobiles, ships, planes, trains etc.

The first thing that strikes our mind when we talk about chemical energy is
photo-synthesis. Plants have chlorophyll in their green parts. Chlorophyll helps
them to utilize sunlight and conduct the reaction between water absorbed from
the earth through their roots and carbon dioxide from air. Thus, they produce

glucose (C,H,,0,) and oxygen (O,). This oxygen is released by the plants. This

12

reaction is called photo-synthesis. However, the sunlight that participates in the
reaction remains in the plant in the form of chemical energy.

Forma-23, Chemistry Class-9-10
178 Chemistry

Fig 8.03: Photosynthesis.

Besides, the body of both plants and animals produce fat and protein. They also
contain chemical energy. Again, humans and other animals consume them as
food. The body of humans and plants can be called chemical engines, Plants get
chemical energy from this carbohydrate, protein and fat. This energy turns into
heat or other energy. Plants and animals use these transformed energies to
conduct different activities. Therefore, it is understood that without chemical
energy, life is impossible.

8.2.3 Appropriate Use of Chemical Energy

Petroleum, coal natural gas etc. are called fossil fuel. These fuels have chemical
energy stored in them. Burning these fuels or letting them to react with oxygen,
heat energy can be obtained. This heat energy is used for cooking, running

automobiles and electricity generation.

Besides providing heat energy, burning these fossil fuels have harmful effects on
nature. They produce carbon dioxide. The amount of that every year is 21.3
billion tons of carbon dioxide. This gas is a greenhouse gas, meaning it contains
heat. As a result, the world is getting warmer day by day. Again, carbon dioxide
reacts with rain water and produces carbonic acid (H,CO,), When it comes down
to earth with rain, we call that acid rain, which is very harmful for nature. These
bad effects of fossil fuels are imposing a threat to life on earth. Therefore, we
need to be meticulous in using fossil fuels. We should not use excess fossil fuel.
Excessive use of fossil fuels will end up their reserve. Meticulous use will ensure
that the reserve remains for our future and they won’t impose any bad effect on
our lives.

20235
2025

Chemistry and Energy 179

$.2.4 Importance of Purity of Fuel

We are constantly making use of various kinds of fuels to get chemical energy.
Their purity is an important factor. If we burn them in insufficient air, carbon
monoxide is produced alongside carbon dioxide, which is a harmful gas. It is
dangerous for our health. Natural fuels are of crude form. They have mixture of
compounds of nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus etc. That is why, these fuels need
refinement before being sent to the market. If we burn them without refinement,
the oxides of these elements also go in the air. These oxides mix with rainwater
and form acids which again come down to earth with rain. The acid rain is:

CO, + HO — », 4#H,C0,
Carbon dioxide + Water t+ Carbonic Acid

2505 ac 0, ———* 2504
Sulfur dioxide + Oxygen ————+ Sulfur trioxide
2505 + 2H,0 ——> 2Ha504
Sulfur trioxide + Water —§ Sulfur acid

4 NO, — 2H,0 + 0, —<$$<— 4HNOS

Sullur trioxide + Water + Oxygen ———+ Nitric acid

This acid rain causes huge damage to our environment, Plants die due to this rain,
Water in water bodies turn acidic which makes survival of the fishes and
other living bodies tough. Then, the smoke of automobiles consists of
carbon monoxide, nitrous oxide and unused methane. In the presence of
sunlight, these react to create various plosonous gases. They are known as
photochemical smog, Elements of this smog harm the ozone (O,) layer of our
atmosphere, Ozone protects the earth from the ultraviolet rays of sun. If this
ozone layer is harmed, ives of humans will be in danger.
180 Chemistry

§.2.5 Negative Effects of the Use of Chemical Energy

We burn fuels in order to get energy. Mainly, we make use of chemical energy
through the use of fuels. Although, presently we are using solar energy, nuclear
energy, wind energy, hydro energy etc. yet, the major part of our required energy
is provided by fossil fuels. We have already learned that every year, we are
producing 21.3 billion tons of carbon dioxide gas by burning fossil fuels. Trees
take in carbon dioxide in its photo-synthesis process. Besides, some other
natural processes use up half of it. The other half remains on earth. As carbon
dioxide is a heavy gas, it remains below the atmosphere. It does not undergo
reactions with other elements of the atmosphere too. However, it has high heat
absorbing capacity. Due to this, the temperature of the earth is increasing day by
day. This is called global warming. This global warming is melting the ice of the
polar region and thus increasing the sea level. Many countries including
Bangladesh are at risk of being submerged. Besides carbon dioxide, some other
gases are also contributing to the global warming. It is denoted by the term
“Greenhouse effect.” The gases responsible are known as greenhouse gases. You
have already learned about acid rain and photochemical smog. These facts put
carbon dioxide as a major portion of the greenhouse gases for harming the
atmosphere. The greenhouse gases undergo reactions with the ozone layer and
harm its quality. The ozone layer acts as the filter of sunlight in the atmosphere.
The ultra violet ray of the sun is very harmful for our skin and it may even cause
cancer, The ozone layer prevents this ultra violet ray.

8.2.6 Uses of Ethanol as Fuel

The other name of ethanol is ethyl alcohol the formula of which is CH,-CH,-OH.
Burning of this aleohol also produces heat like the fuels already discussed.
Therefore, it can also be used im engines of all kinds of vehicles and carriers as a
fuel. Many countries including North America are using it as a mix with fossil
fuels. All automobiles in USA use fuel with 10% ethanol mixed in it. Thus
ethanol may be a suitable substitute for fossil fuels relieving the pressure on our
reserves.

£023
2025

Chemistry and Energy 181

8.3 Chemical Process by Electricity

8.3.1 Electrochemical Cells

Burning fuels, chemical energy can be turned into heat energy which can again
be transformed into electrical energy. Now we will learn how to convert chemical
energy directly into electrical energy and bow to put that electrical energy to use
in order to conduct reactions. The mechanism that helps chemical reactions to
convert chemical energy into electrical energy directly or uses electrical energy
to conduct chemical reactions is called an electrochemical cell. In an
electrochemical cell, two metal sticks or graphite sticks are submerged in one or
two electrolytic solutions. The sticks are connected directly or through a battery
with a metallic wire. The graphite sticks are called electrodes. Electrochemical
cells are of (wo kinds:

(i) Electrolytic Cells: The cell where electricity is driven from an outer source
to carry out a chemical reaction inside the cell is called an electrolytic cell.

(ii) Galvanic Cells: The cell where chemical elements undergo reactions and
produce electrical energy is called a Galvanic cell.

Conductor

The materials, through which electricity can pass, are called electrical
conductors. For example, metals, graphile, molten salt, salt solution, acid and
base solutions ete are electrical conductors.

Depending on the mechanism of passing of electricity, conductors are of two
kinds: Electronic Conductors and Electrolytes.

Electronic Conductors

The substances through which electricity is passed by means of electrons are
called electronic conductors. You have seen, metals contain metallic bonds. As a
result, they contain lots of free electrons. Graphite also contains free electrons.
These substances let electricity pass through and for that, they are electronic
conductors. For example, tron (Fe), copper (Cu), nickel (Ni) ete. are electron
conductors.
182 Chemistry

Electrolyte

The substances that let electricity pass in their melted and solution state but do
not allow in their solid state and simultaneously brings about a chemical change
in that substance are called electrolytes. The electrolytes remain ionized during
their melted or solution state. The ions are used by electrolytes to conduct
electricity. Ionic compounds and some polar covalent compounds become
electrolytes in their molten or solution state. For example, sodium chloride
(NaCl), copper sulfate (CuSO,). sulfuric acid (11,50,). water (H,O), ethanoic
acid (CH,COOH) ete. are of this type.

Electrolytes are again of two types:

(i) Strong Electrolyte: The electrolytes that remain completely ionized in
molten or solution state are called strong electrolytes. Sodium chloride (NaCl),
copper sulfate (CuSO,) and sulfuric acid (H,SO,) are strong electrolytes.

(ii) Weak Electrolytes: The electrolytes that remain ionized at a very little
amount in molten or solution state are called weak electrolytes. Water (H,0),
ethanoic acid (CH,COOH) etc. are of this type.

Electrode

Electrode is a metallic or non-metallic electric conductor. They are electronic
conductors sunk in the solution of electrolytes. In the electrochemical cell, an
element or ion donates an electron to an electrode in an oxidation reaction. The
positive ion accepts electrons from the other electrode in the reduction reaction.
This way, oxidation-reduction occurs in the whole cell. The electrode where
oxidation oceurs is called the anode electrode and the electrode where reduction
occurs is the cathode,

8.3.2 Electrolytie Cell, Electrolysis and the Mechanism of Electrolysis

Electrolytic cell uses electricity to conduct chemical reactions. There occurs a
chemical reaction at the time of electricity passing through molten or solution of
electrolytes, which is known as electrolysis. When electricity passes through
molten sodium chloride, it produces chlorine gas at the anode and sodium metal
at the cathede. This is electrolysis of sodium chloride:

2025
2025

Chemistry and Energy 183

2Nacl(l) ————  2Na(s) + Ch(g)

Mechanism of Electrolysis of Molten
Sodium Chloride

Arode (+ve) Mh athode (-ve)
F

Take molten sodium chloride in a

glassware or ceramic ware. The molten
sodium chloride contains sodium ion
(Na*) and chloride ion (CI) ion. Both of

them are able to migrate. Two metallic >

bars or graphite sticks are submerged

into the molten sodium chloride. If we

connect one of them to the positive part Fig $.04: Electrolysis of Sodium Chloride
of a battery and another to the negative in Electrolytic Cell.

part, the anode connected to the positive part of the battery will atiract negatively
charged Cl ions while cathodes connected with the negative part of the battery
will attract positively charged Na* ions. Cl ions will donate electrons at the
anode and become chlorine gas. The oxidation at the anode:

ck] —— > id,+e

On the other side, Na* accepts electron from the cathode and becomes metallic
sodium. The recuction at the cathode:
Nat+e —~> Na

The ion that is attracted by the cathode is called a cation and the ion attracted by
the anode is an anion.

Identification of Chlorine Gas at Anode with Litmus Paper

If we collect the gas produced during the electrolysis of molten NaCl in a test
tube and hold a wet blue litmus on the test tube, the paper will turn red. That will
prove the presence of chlorime gas.
184 Chemistry

cl + HO —~ Hcl + Hoc!
Chlorine + Water — Hydrochloric acid + Hypochlorous acid

Since Chlorine gas and water undergo a reaction and produce two acids, the blue
litmus turns red.

Electrolysis of Concentrate Sodium Chloride Solution

In concentrated sodium chloride solution, NaC] becomes ionized and produces
Na® and Cl ions.

Nac] ————> Nat + cb
The difference from molten sodium chloride is that the solution contains H* and
OF ions too as water is partially ionized here.

HO ——— H* + OH”
During the electrolysis in this electrolytic cell, Na’ and H* will go towards
the cathode together. We know, H* ion is more prone to accept electrons than the
Na‘ ion. So, H* ion accepts one electron at the cathode and becomes a H atom.

Two H atoms again join together and become a H, molecule. The reaction at the
cathode:

H* + e~ — H (Reduction reaction)

H+H > H,

Cl and OH go simultaneously towards the anode. We know, OH ion is more
prone to donate an electron than Cl, However, since the molarity of CI in the
solution is higher than OH ion, so it donates electrons at the anode earher than
OH. One CI ion donates an electron at the anode and becomes a Cl atom. Two
Cl atoms join together producing a Cl, molecule. The reaction at the anode:

cl + cl+e ( Oxidation)
c+cd 7 cL,

2025
Chemistry and Energy

Na* and OH remain as left Cholorine gas

over in the container. They
undergo a reaction and

I

: NaC]
produce NaOH. solution

This way, if any solution
consists of multiple cations
and anions, which cation of
will discharge first at the

185

Hydrogen gas

NaOH
solution

a a

cathode or which anion will

receive the charge at the Fig 8.05: Electrolysis of Sodium Chloride
anode is determined by three Concentrate Solution.
factors:

(i) The Tendency of Cations and Anions to
Discharge:

If there are more than one kind of cations in an
electrolysis, there is a priority list for the cations
which specifies which of them will discharge first.
The series is called Reactivity Series of Metals or
Electro Chemical Series. Between any two
elements of this series, the element above is more
reactive and it take parts the reaction earlier than the
other. Again, the one ion of element at the lower order
between any two elements will accept the electron
earlier and discharge or become reduced. For
example, among Na* and H*, H* is at lower order
than Na* and so, it will discharge accepting
electrons earlier and be reduced. Again, Fe** is at a
comparative lower order between Fe* and Zn**. So,
Fe** will discharge earlier.

Table 8.02: Electrochemical

Cation

Anton

Li
ra
Na*
Mg”
Al*
zn*
Fe**
Sn*"
Ph?
Ht
cu 4
Ag’

Au*

There is another series specifying the priority of anions to donate electrons and
discharge in electrolysis. This series is called Electrochemical Series of Anions.

Forma-24, Chemistry Class-9-10
186 Chemistry

The one that is at the comparative lower order between any two ions in the
series will donate an electron earlier and discharge or be oxidized. Between S0,*
and Cl, Cl is situated lower than the other. So, Cl will donate an electron earlier
and be discharge or be oxidized, OH is at the lower order between Cl and OH,
So OF wil discharge, donating an electron first and be oxidized.

(ii) Effect of Concentration of Cations and Anions: When there are more than
one cations and anions in the solution, the effect of molarity is a more important
factor than the tendency to discharge. The molarity of Cl ion in 0.1 molar NaCl
solution at room temperature will be 0.1 molar. On the other hand, ionizing
water, the molarity of OH’ ion will be 107 molar. That means the molarity of Cl
ion 1s 10° times larger than that of OH ion. According to the electrochemical
series, OH’ is situated lower than Cl and it is supposed to be the first to
discharge. But due to molarity or concentration, Cl ion in this case will be the

first to discharge.

(iii) Nature of Electrode: Sometimes, the kind of electrode causes an exception
in the above two factors of discharge in an electrolytic cell. NaCl aqua solution
has two kinds of cations- Na* and H*, When a platinum electrode is used, then
according to the factor (i), H* discharges and produces H, gas. But this changes

when mercury is used as a cathode and then Na‘ ion discharges earlier.
Electrolysis of Pure Water

In the electrolysis of pure water, anodes and cathodes of some inert metals are
used in electrolytic cells. Usually it is platinum. Water exists a little bit tonized:

4H,0 c= 4Ht + 40H

A few drops of sulfuric acid is added to water to increase decomposition of
water. Now. when electricity is passed through, anode attracts hydroxyl (OH)
ion and cathode attracts hydrogen (F1') ion. The following reactions take place at
the electrodes:

20235
ue,
=
ey

Chemistry and Energy 187

Cathode: 4H* + 4e— - 2H, ({ Reduction)

Anode: 40H~ — 0,+ 2H,0 + 4e~ (Oxidation)

Hydrogen is produced at the cathode and Oxygen is produced at the anode.

You may be thinking why some

Oxygen _ Hydrogen gas
drops of sulfuric acid or some gas Ve
lattice of NaCl is required here. .
You know, electricity does not 1 ber l = Beary
pass until it is a complete of [ool
‘ G o

circuit, Electron is the medium Mixtweot | Ey] [

. _ _ ‘water and = Cathode, }—— Anode
of the flow of electricity in gojq

anode, cathode or battery. Water
hardly gets ionized. So, pure

. ig 8.06: Electrolysis of Water.
water acts like non-conductor. Fig

To increase the conductivity of water, some drops of sulfuric acid is necessary.

8.3.3 Use of electrolysis

Presently, mills and industries have sprung up all over the world. The
contributions of electrolysis in the industrial sector is enormous.
Production of important compounds, extraction of metals from ores, purification
of metals, protection from decay, prevention of rust etc. processes require
electrolysis and electrolysis requires electrolytic cells. Some of the usages are
described below:

Extraction of Metals: Alkali metals, alkaline earth metals. alumimum ete. active
metals are extracted through electrolysis. Usually, the cathodes produce these
metals when electricity is passed through the electrodes in the liquids of
188 Chemistry

such metallic compounds or solutions. For example, in the electrolysis of
sodium chloride, we find sodium metal at the cathode and chlorine gas at the
anode.

In the electrolysis of molten pure aluminum oxide or alumina (AlI,O,),
aluminum metal is produced at the cathode and oxygen gas at the anode.

ALO; —— 2AP+ + 307

Reaction at the anode: 307 ++ 0, + 6e7
Reaction at the cathode: 2Al* + 6e€ — 2Al

Purification of Metals: After extraction, the metals contains various other
elements mixed in them. Electrolysis is highly effective to purify these metals.
Purification of copper, zinc, lead. aluminum ete. involves the electrolysis
process. The same adulterated metal electrode of the adulterated metal is
connected to the positive edge of the battery. A pure electrode of the same metal
is connected to the negative edge of the battery. When electricity is passed
through, the metallic ion from the impure electrode goes into the solution and
from the solution the ion is transferred to the pure electrode. As a result, the pure

electrode thickens while the impure electrode decays.

Electroplating: Adding a coating of a metal on another metal is called
electroplating. The process is used for increasing brightness of a metal or to
prevent degradation of a metal. Less reactive metals do not react with oxygen of
the air. To prevent degradation of a metal, a coating of a comparatively less
reactive metal is given on the outer layer of that metal. Usually, nickel,
chromium etc. metals are used in electroplating. Iron rusts and decays when it
comes in contact with water vapor and air. Nickel, chromium or silver coating is
used on iron. They prevent air and water vapors to come in direct contact with

iron. The process 1s discussed below:

£023
2025

Chemistry and Energy 189

To electroplate iron products such as
a spoon, a solution of AgNO, is taken

in a glass container. The product that
Silver

will receive the coating is connected cAnode)

to the negative edge of a battery and
thus is dealt as a cathode. A silver foil

Speon

is used as an anode. When electricity ya
{cathode}

is passed in the solution, the metallic

Ag atom from the anode donates an

electron and goes into the solution as ~ o-

Ag’ ions. This Ag* ion from the ;
Fig 8.07: Silver Electroplating on Spoon.

solution accepts an electron from the cathode and sticks itself to the cathode as

metallic silver. Thus the coating of silver is done.

Decomposition of AgNO, in solution: AgNO, — Ag* + NOs,
Oxidation at anode: Ag — Agt+ &
Reduction at cathode: Ag” + e*— Ag

Commercial Use of Products with Electrolysis

We can do many things with electrolysis. Various metals such as sodium.
aluminum, zinc, calcium, magnesium etc. are extracted fom ores by
electrolysis. Besides, purification of copper, gold, silver etc. involves
electrolysis. The present world has a great demand for these metals.

We know, silver and copper has the least amount of resistance. Since silver is a
precious metal, copper is generally used in producing an electric wire, Can you
imagine a place on earth without an electric wire? Alumimum is another
important metal as it is necessary to make utensils. Since the metal is light, it is
extensively used in making airplanes. Zinc and magnesium are required to add

coatings on iron products. Chromium, nickel, gold, silver etc. are electroplating
190 Chemistry

metals on less precious metals to add brightness. This makes the ornaments more
lucrative.

Chlorine gas produced from electrolysis of sea water is used as an anti-parasite
agent. Sodium hydroxide is used as a raw material in different industries.

8.4 Production of Electricity by Chemical Reactions

Galvanic Cell or Voltaic Cell

Galvanic or Voltaic cells are those electrochemical cells where the elements
within undergo reactions to produce electricity. In a Galvanic cell, usually two
electrodes of different elements are submerged in two different electrolytic
solutions in two different containers. The more reactive metal electrode is used

as the anode and the less reactive metal electrode is the cathode. In a galvanic or
woltaic cell, an electrode made of a particular metal must be placed in a solution of a
salt of the same metal (electrolyte) so that ions of that metal are present in the electro-
lyte For example, if an electrode is made of copper, it has to be kept in CuSO,

solution. Similarly. a zinc electrode is kept in ZnSO, solution. When the two
electrodesate externally connected with a metal wire, electrons can {low from one
to other, meaning low of electricity is ensured. A U shaped salt bridge is created
between the two electrolytic solutions. The U shaped glass tube contains KCl
salt solution. To make it more clear to you, the structure of a Daniell cell is
described below.

Daniell Cell

The cell was invented by John Frederick Daniell in 1836. It is named after him.

Two glass or ceramic containers are taken, one partially filled with copper
sulphate (CuSO,) solution and another with zinc sulphate (ZnSO,) solution. A
copper stick is dipped in CuSO, and a zine stick is dipped in ZnSO,. A U-shaped

salt bridge is dipped inthe two solutions, as shown in the picture, to connect

2025
2025

Chemistry and Energy 191

them. A metal wire is used to connect the two electrodes. A bulb connected at
the middle of the wire lights up when electricity starts to flow. Here, a zinc atom
donates two electrons to the zinc electrode and turns into zine ion (Zn**). It
leaves the electrode and goes into the solution. The zinc electrode accepts the
two electrons and becomes negatively charged. Then the electrons flow through
the connecting wire. Since the metallic zinc turns into Zn* in the electrode, so it

is an oxidation reaction at the anode:

Oxidation at anode: Zn + Zn*++2e
Now, the two electrons from the zine anode enters the copper electrode. Through
this electrode, the Cu** ion from CuSO, solution accepts the electrons and turns
into metallic copper (Cu). Since the process is reduction here, so the copper
electrode is regarded as the cathode electrode.

Reduction at cathode: Cu7+ + 2e — Cu
The total reaction in the cell: Za + Cu — Zn*+Cu

Sinee zinc has donated electrons at Sane
the anode, so that constitutes i

oxidation. But donating electron Zing
only does not complete a reaction. ‘A2°¢°) _ Saige
The copper ion at the cathode

electrode has accepted those

elecirons and completed the
reduction reaction, That means half -
the reaction has occurred at the Fig 8,08: Galvanic (Deniell) cell.

anode and the other half at the cathode. So, the reaction at the anode is oxidation

half reaction and the reaction at the cathode is reduction half reaction, And the

total reaction is a redox reaction.

Electrons from anode enter the cathode through the connecting wire. That means
es

Chemistry

the flow of electricity occurred here or electricity was produced. That proves, a

Galvanic cell transforms chemical energy into electrical energy.

Table 8.03: Difference between Electrolytic Cell and Galvanic Cell.

Electrolytic Cell

Galvanic Cell

The cell where electric energy is used
to facilitate a chemical réaction is
called an electrolytic cell.

The cell where a chemical reaction
produces electric energy is called a
Galvanic cell.

In an electrolytic cell the anode is
positively charged and cathode is

In a Galvanic cell, the anode is
negatively charged and the cathode is

negatively charged, positively charged.

Producing substances, electroplating,
metal purification etc.
electrolytic cells.

Electricity production mechanism

involve | like a battery uses this technology.

Electrodes in Galvanic Cells

There are various kinds of electrodes of Galvanic cell. The easiest to make is a
metal-metal ion electrode. This kind of electrode can be made by dipping half or
more than half ofa stick or foil of a metal in a solution contaming ion of the same
metal, The written expression of such an electrode can be composed of the metal
name followed by its ion with a vertical lme in between. For example, if a Zn
stick 1s dipped in a ZnSO, solution, which makes a zinc metal electrode, it can
be expressed Zn|Zn?*, The reaction that occurs here is:

——

So zn** + 2e

en
Electrodes of more reactive metals such as sodium, potassium, calcium etc.

cannot be produced in this manner. In such cases, amalgam is commonly used. An
amalgam is amixture of mercury and active metals.

2025
Chemistry and Energy
Identification of Anodes and Cathodes in Galvanic Cells

Determination of anode and
cathode in a Galvanic cell

193

Table 8.04: Electrode and Reaction.

constituted with two | plectrode Reaction

electrodes depends on the

element they are made of, | 2n/2n* Zn(s) ——— > Zn**(aq) + 2
Electrodes made of less

2+ ——— 2s,

reactive elements situated at culcu Culs) = cated) + 2e
the lower ranks of Fe|Fe** Fe(s) === Fe*{aq) + 2
the electrochemical series

constitute a cathode while the AglAgt Ag(s) ===> Agt(aqg) + &
more reactive elements of the

upper ranks constitute the anode. Of the ‘Toble 8.05:

electrochemical series, any two elements constituting a
Galvanic cell, the lower ranked electrode is cathode and the
higher ranked electrode is anode. For example, if a Galvanic
cell is constituted with a copper electrode and a silver electrode,
the copper metal electrode is anode and the silver metal
electrode is cathode. Table 8.05 shows copper is
comparatively higher ranked than silver.
In this cell, copper atom donates electron and turns into copper
ion.
Oxidation half reaction at anode:

cu > Cu* +26

Again, silver ion accepts electron and turns into silver atom.

Reduction half reaction at cathode:

Zig’ + Ze — 2Ag
Adding the two half reactions, we get the total reaction of the
cell:

Cu + 2Agt — Cu’ + 2Ag

Forma-25, Chemistry Class-9-10

Electrode,

Electrode

LilLit

KIE*

NalNa*

Mg|Mz"*

AIJAP*

zn|Zn**

Fe|Fe?*

NilNi?*

Sn[Sn**
Pb|Pb**

H,|H*

Culcu

AglAg*

AulAu**

194 Chemistry

Salt Bridge and Its Use

You have seen in the Daniell cell, in anode, metallic zinc donates two electrons
to become zinc ion. This electron is conducted through the connecting wire
towards the cathode. As a result, the ion in the anode solution increases.

Oxidation half reaction in anode:

Zn — Zn*+4+2¢

On the other hand, the Cu** ion in the CuSO4 solution at the cathode accepts the
two electrons and turns into charge neutral Cu atom without changing the
composition of SO,* ion. As a result, the solution becomes negatively charged
and the flow of electricity stops within a while. The salt bridge comes into effect
at this stage. A chemical substance named agar-agar mixed with KCl is put inside

a U-shaped tube. It creates a gel like substance which is called the salt bridge.

Both K* and Cl ions im this
substance have the same velocity.
Two cotton buds at the two faces of
the bridge (like in the fig) help
connect the two solutions externally.

e

Now, the surplus charges in the
anode are joined by the same
number of Cl ion from the bridge in
the anode solution. Similarly, the
reduced number of positive charges
in cathode solution is joined by K*
ions from the bridge. Thus, the
charge neutrality of both the Fig 8.09: Salt bridge in Cell.
solutions is maintained and the flow

of electricity is continued.

20235
2025

Chemistry and Energy 195

Dry cell

Dry cell is a kind of Galvanic cell. Dry cell transforms chemical energy into
electrical energy. We use dry cells in torch lights, TV remotes, toy remotes etc.
Dry cell is also composed of an anode and a cathode.

A small container made of
zine is used as an anode in a

dry cell. The container is +

filled with a paste of Metall eh

manganese dioxide (MnO,), washer and

ammonium chloride (NH,Cl), seal

zine chloride (ZnCl) and Pail <‘caadic aia
Carbon tod ~ ——# Zine pot

distilled water. A carbon MnO;, NH4Cl,

(graphite) stick is inserted at ZnCl;
and distilled water

Paper

the center of the container to
act as a cathode. When two
wires connect the two edges Metal based -———“ =

(positive and negative) of a :
. Fig 8.10: Dry cell.
bulb or electronic item with

the zine container and the carbon stick, the following reaction occurs:

Zine at the anode donates two elecirons and becomes Zn**:

Anode reaction,
fn uw», Zn 4 2e

These two electrons come to the carbon rod through the connector and combine
with ammonium ion (NH,*) and manganese dioxide (MnO,) to produce
ammonia gas (NH,), dimanganese tri-oxide. The reaction:
Cathode reaction,

2NH,' + 2Mn0,+ 2e ——+. 2NH; + Mn,0,; + HO
196 Chemistry

The total cell reaction stands:

zn + 2NH, + 2Mn0, ——» Zn++ 2NH, + Mn,0, + 1,0

When the anode and cathode edges are connecied to a bulb or any electronic
item, the flow of electricity begins or electricity is generated. Therefore,
wherever electricity is required, if we connect the dry cell there, the above

reaction will occur and we'll get electricity.

Application of Electrochemical Cells

Coating a metal on another metal has
been there in practice from the ancient
age. Now that has increased hugely.
Electrolysis is used for extraction of
metals, production of valuable chemicals,
electricity generation, purification of
substance etc. Hydrogen fuel cell is used
for electricity generation. Hydrogen
molecule is oxidized at ils anode and
oxygen molecule is reduced at the

cathode to produce water. As a result,
Fig 8.11: Machine to test Blood Sugar. in the cell electron is conducted from

anode to cathode. This electricity can be
used to run cars even. All mobile phones, computers, calculators etc. all over

the world use batteries.

Blood sugar in the diabetic patients is tested and determined by a machine that
uses electrolysis mechanism. The figure above demonstrates that. The part on
the left hand has small thin anode and cathode in it. There is a small channel in
between them. When blood is inserted in the channel that forms a complete cell.
Indeed, the source in the machine would supply electricity that oxidizes glucose

£023
2025

Chemistry and Energy 197

of blood at the anode. On the other hand, the calculating system of the machine
determines the number of glucose cells in blood and shows it on the screen
converting that into digits. Interesting is that all these processes take less than a
minute.

Effect of Battery on Health and Environment

We use batteries for various purposes. In torch lights, we use dry cells, buses and
trucks uses lead-storage batteries etc. These batteries use various metals
and metallic ions. These are
extremely harmful for our body.
Dry cell contains zinc and
manganese dioxide and
lead-storage battery contains
lead (Pb), lead oxide (PbO,),
etc. According to chemical
properties, these are toxic and
carcinogenic. We trash them

anywhere we feel like alter use,

That gives the extreme

Fig $8.12: Battery in a Mobile phone.

hazard of mixing with soil and
water leading to contamination.

8.5 Nuclear Reactions and Generation of Electricity

Nuclear Reaction

The reaction where the nucleus of an element undergoes a transformation is
called a nuclear reaction. The electron exchange in any chemical reaction occurs
from the outermost energy layer of an atom or ion, This leaves the nucleus
intact, But in the case of nuclear reactions, an electron does not have any role;
the nucleus undergoes change and nucleus of a new element's atom is formed.
198 Chemistry

The reaction that results in the amalgamation of smaller nucleus into a larger
nucleus of an atom or the larger nucleus breaking into a smaller nucleus is a
nuclear reaction, There are various kinds of nuclear reactions, Fission and

Fusion are the two most significant of them.

Nuclear Fission Reaction

The nuclear process in which the nucleus of
a larger and heavy element is broken into
the nucleus of smaller elements is called
a fission reaction. When we © strike
a735U nucleus with a neutron at low velocity,
the nucleus becomes almost equally
divided into two parts and produces
‘Ba and 32Kr nuclei 03 neutrons
(in) and a huge amount of energy. It is Fig 8.13: Nuctear Fission Reaction,
a nuclear fission reaction,

“320 + gn ——» ‘Ypa+ $2kr +3 in +Huge amount of energy

Nuclear Fusion Reaction

The nuclear process in which a number of nucleus of smaller and light elements
combine into a nucleus of a larger element is called a fusion reaction, Below is
an example of a fusion reaction:

tH + {7H ———* $He + jn + Huge amount of energy

Fusion reaction is the basis of a hydrogen bomb.

Nuclear Chain Reaction

Basically, the nuclear fission reactions are nuclear chain reactions. The reactions ta
that do not require application of extra energy to continue once they startare  %
2025

Chemistry and Energy

called chain reactions. You have seen, when we
strike a 733U nucleus with a neutron it breaks
into one ‘2: Ba and one #2Kr nucleus, 03 neutrons
(jn) and huge amount of energy. If we can control
the pace of these three neutrons, they will strike
other *23U isotopes. That way, more neutrons
will be produced. These newer neutrons will

again do the same thing if they are brought

©

199

1 He
ry

under control, resulting in more neutrons. This Fig 8.14: Nuclear Fusion Reaction,

kind of reaction is a chain reaction, The control of nuclear chain reaction is quite
a complex thing and chain reaction is the basis of electricity generation in

nuclear reactors.

Generation of Electricity

Nuclear reactors are used for power generation. The reactor which helps control
the chain reactions that occur during a nuclear fission reaction is called a nuclear
reactor. These reactors can produce huge amount of electricity. The smaller
elements that are produced during a fission reaction are highly accelerated,
These smaller elements bombard each other as well as the reactor walls and

produce a huge amount of heat
energy. This heat is channeled
through to an elevator chamber
where it is used for producing
vapors. The vapors are then
channeled to run turbines so
that electricity can be
produced. In some versions,
the elevator chamber is situated
within the reactor. Nuclear
reactors are used for

Fig 8.15: Nuclear reactor.

200 Chemistry

power generation in many countries of the world. The government of
Bangladesh has taken the necessary preparation for setting up a nuclear power
generation facility at Ruppoor of Pabna district. Bangladesh will become
self-sufficient in electricity once the project is complete. In the near future, all
off Bangladesh will have electricity coverage.

e Make a Galvanic cell to produce electricity.

Principle: The electrochemical ?

cell where electricity is

generated through a chemical zip. |

reaction is called a Galvanic ‘4node) Copper
cell. Two rods, one zine rod
partially dipped in zinc
sulphate (ZnSQ,) solution and
one copper rod in copper
sulphate (CuSO,) solution, are /
connected by a copper wire to Fig 8.16: Electricity production

make the Galvanic cell. Here in a Galvanic cell.

in the cell, the zinc atom donates two electrons and turns into zinc ion (Zn*").
The electrons reach the copper rod through the connecting wire, Copper ion
(Cu*') from copper sulphate solution accepts these two electrons and turns
into metallic copper. The flow of electrons through the copper wire generates
electricity. The zinc rod acts as an anode and the copper rod as a cathode in
the cell,

Zn ———+» Zn*+2e (Reaction in anode)

cu** + 2e° ————» Cu (Reaction in cathode)

LS Zn + Cu’* ———+Zn*+Cu (Reaction in Cell) /

2025
Chemistry and Energy 201

/ Neibiieey Apparatus and Chemicals: Two beakers, zinc gulps \
(ZnSO,) solution, copper sulphate (CuSO,) solution, zinc rod, copper rods,
an LED bulb, a salt bridge or a long piece of wet paper, copper wire etc.

Procedure: Follow the figure and dip the zine rod in ZnSO, and the
copper rod in CuSO, solution in the two beakers. Now place the piece of
wet paper following the picture so that the two edges are dipped in the two
solutions. Now connect the copper wire to the zine and copper rods.
Connect the copper connector part of the wire to the positive edge of the
LED and the zine connector part to the negative edge of the LED. The LED
will light up as soon as the connection is settled. At this stage, the zine rod
will continue to decay as zine ion continues to go into the solution and the
copper ion from the solution transfers to the copper rod.

In reality, the above reaction occurs inside the cell. The chemical energy in
the chemical reaction is transformed into electrical energy here.

Caution:

The two solutions have to be of equal volume.

The bridge has to be maintained properly. a

l.
i
a Observing the change of temperature after dissolving samaiseiatann
chloride (NH, CI) in water

Principle: Ammonium chloride, when dissolved in water, gets ionized in
the following way:
NH,Cl ————» NH, + cl
To break the crystal of ammonium chloride and to get its molecules ionized,
some energy is required. This energy comes from the water which results in
the fall of temperature of the water. Thus the dissolving of ammonium
\ chloride in water is an endothermic reaction. uw

Forma-26, Chemustry Class-9-10
202 Chemistry

(~ \

Apparatus and Chemicals:
Beaker, ammonium chloride
(NH,Cl), distilled water, glass rod
and thermometer.

Procedure: tet

Take 50 gram distilled water in
the beaker. Record the
temperature of water with a Fig 8.17: NH,Cl solution in beaker.
thermometer. Add 10 grams of
ammonium chloride in the water,

Stir the ammonium chloride with the glass rod so that the substance is fully
dissolved. Record the temperature as soon as it is dissolved.

Result: The data collected will show that the temperature of water
decreased when ammonium chloride was dissolved in it. That proves the
reaction as endothermic.

Ne /

‘i Tt

The observation of change of temperature adding lime in water

Principle: Lime or calcium oxide added to water undergoes the following
reaction:

cao ++ HQ = ——» Ca(OH), + Heat
Calcium oxide Water Calcium hydroxide

This reaction is an exothermic reaction. Therefore, the temperature of water
along with calcium hydroxide is increased.

Apparatus and Chemicals: beaker, calcium oxide (lime), distilled water,
lass rod and thermometer.

Nee J

20235

2025

Chemistry and Energy 203

( )

Procedure:
l. Fill half of the beaker with distilled

water. >

2. Record the temperature of water
using the thermometer.

3, Add lime or calcium oxide to the
water in the beaker.

4, Stir the solution in the beaker as the Fig 0.18: Solution af lisse in beakee,
reaction starts.

5. Record the temperature of water as soon as possible with the
thermometer. You will see, the temperature is higher than the previous one.

Result: Adding lime to water raises the temperature of water. It is an
exothermic reaction.

XS S

(?) Exercise

1. How many kinds of conductors are there on the basis of electrical conductivity
mechanism?
a, One b, Two

c. Three d. Four
Answer questions 2 and 3 depending on the picture above.

2. The process of the stem does to iron-

a. is Increased in amount b. prevents corrosion

c. increases strength d. increases purity
204 Chemistry

3. In the above picture:
i, Ni is corroded Battery
ii. Fe acts as an anode +| =
_ Nickel Tron
iil. Exchange of electron occurs

Which is correct?

a.i and ii b. ii and iii a
ec. iand iti iv. i, ii and iii “e
- 5 F S04" Ni?*
4, Which of the followings acts as an oxidant in the
dry cell?
a, Zn rod b. MnO,

c. Carbon rodd. d. NH,"

5. What is the name of the process of giving metallic coating ona different metal

through electrolysis?

a. Voleanizing b. Metal purification

c. Galvanizing d. Electroplating
6. Which of the followings is used for striking a nucleus during a nuclear
reaction?

a. Proton b. Electron

c. Positron d. Neutron

7. Electrolysis of an aqueous solution of NaC] with platinum electrode produces-
1. Hydrogen gas
it. Chlorine gas

iii, Sodium hydroxide solution

Which is correct?
ai &il b. ii & ii
c. i & tii d. i, ti & iti

£023
2025

Chemistry and Energy 205

1. (i) Petroleum +0, ——» CO, + H,O + Energy

(ii) "U + ont —» Ba + Kr + 3pm’ + Energy
(iii) Zn + Cucl, ——» Zncl, + Cu + Energy

a. What is electroplating?

b. Why a salt bridge is used in an electrochemical cell?

c. In the stem, the second reaction is not a chemical reaction. — Explain.

d. Compare the reactions (i) and (iii) in terms of production of energy.

ea Battery
a. What is a metallic conductor?

b. Why is acidic water called an electrolytic
conductor? Explain

c. Explain the reaction that occurs in an anode of the

above cell of the picture. Molten MgCl,

d. Explain the necessity of electricity supply to the
illustrated reaction.

ai i. Electrolytic cell ii. Galvanic cell

a. What is an exothermic reaction?

b.Why are some drops of sulfuric acid required in the electrolysis of
water?

c. Describe the formation of number (i) cell.

d. Analyze the possibility of electricity production through cell number

(ii).
