Chapter One
Lessons on Life

In flourishing human civilization the production of food, development of
medical science and the protection of existance of all living beings in adverse
conditions are the challenges of the present century. The role of biology is
indispensible in this regard. In this chapter, the definition of biology, names of its
branches and naming system of organisms are discussed.

Forma-01, Biology Class-9-10
explain the concept of biology;

describe the main branches of biology;

explain the concept of the classification of organisms;

evaluate the necessities of the classification of organisms;

describe the systems of the classification of organisms;

explain the concept of Binomial Nomenclature of organisms and its
significance;

become conscious about the necessity of the classification of organisms in
practical life,

2025
£23

1.1 Concept of Biology

In nature, we generally find two types of objects: non-living things and living
organisms. Those who have life, they are living organisms and those who have
no life, they are non-living things. The characteristics of non-living things are
usually discussed in Physics and Chemistry. Biology is the branch of scientific
knowledge concerning life and characteristics of organisms. But it is really
difficult to find the very faint line of difference between living and non-living.
In fact physics and chemistry embody the principles of fundamentals of life,
even the non-living. So, in order to understand living organisms, il is necessary
to know about the physical sciences i.e. physics and chemistry. But it is wrong
to think that it is not necessary to study biology if we have knowledge of
physical sciences. Rather, life may be considered a complex combination of
many non-living things in which some new characteristics occur. For example,
the properties of water do not resemble that of hydrogen and oxygen, though it
is made up of these two elements. So, although living organisms are constituted
of a specific combination of non-living things, new properties originate in them
that do not always resemble that of their non-living components.

Biology is one of the fundamental branches of science. The term ‘biology’
is derived from the Greek words, 'bios' meaning life and ‘logos’ meaning
knowledge. As biology plays an important role in agriculture and medicine,
from the beginning of civilization it was practiced in different regions
including Greece, Egypt, Middle East, India and China. However, this
practice cannot be considered as science in terms of modern science but it
was necessary then to flourish this branch of knowledge.

1.2 Branches of Biology

When we look around us, we see two types of living things-plants and animals.
Based on this, for a long time biology was divided into two branches - Botany
and Zoology. This trend is still in force. However, the field of biology has
expanded so much that it is not enough to confine its study to these two branches
only. There are many living beings which are neither planis nor animals. such as
bacteria, fungi. The classification is not appropriate when analyzing common
characteristics of ammials, plants, bacteria, fungi, viruses etc. So now also
biology has been classified into many branches. Considering its aspect, there are
also two other divisions of biology- Physical Biology and Applied Biology. In
physical branch the investigation on the basis of theory gets more importance
than applied side. On the other hand, applied side gets more importance in
applied branch.

1.2.1 Physical Biology

In the field of Physical Biology, theoretical concepts are usually discussed. The
following subjects are the general fields of its concern.

1. Morphology: This deals with the form and structure of organisms. It is
usually divided into two branches - external and internal morphology. The
external description of the body is called external morphology and the internal
description of the body is called internal morphology.

2. Taxonomy: Classification of organisms and related principles are discussed
in this branch.

3. Physiology: This branch of biology deals with the biochemical activities of
different organs of organisms, such as respiration, excreation, photosynthesis
etc. Detailed description of all the physiological process of organisms is found
in it.

4. Histology: The microscopic structure, arrangement and function of plant and
animal tissues are studied in this subject.

5. Embryology: The branch of biology that discusses the origin of gametes, the
origin of embryo of fertilized egg, the development of embryo, their structure,
growth and development.

6. Cytology: The structure, function and division of an individual cell in a body
of organisms is studied in this branch of biology.

7.Geneties: This branch of biology deals with genes and heredity.

8.Evolution: The gradual development of life and organisms over successive
generations on earth is studied in this subject.

9, Ecolegy: It is the science of the reciprocal relationship between organisms
and their environment.

10. Endocrinology: The field of science that deals with the study of endocrine
glands and hormones secreted by them.

2025
2025

11.Biogeography: The branch of biology that studies the geographical
distribution of organisms and their evolution. It is also related with the
classification of earth on the basis of the geographical distribution of organisms.

1.2.2 Applied Biology

Applied subjects related to life are included in this category, and some of them
are mentioned below:

1.Palaeontology: Science of the prehistoric life forms and fossils.
2.Biostatistics: Science of statistics of organisms.

3.Parasitology: Science related to parasitism, life process of parasitic
organisms and diseases caused by them.

4. Fisheries: Science dealing with fish, harvesting of fish, management and
conservation of fish assets.

5. Entomology: Science related to the study of life, merit, demerit, and control
of insects including the damages caused by them.

6.Microbiology: Science related to virus, bactena, fungi and other microorganisms.
7. Agriculture: Science concerning agriculture.

§.Medical Science: Science related to human body, diseases, treatment etc.
9,Genetic Engineering: Science associated with gene technology and its uses.

10. Biochemistry: Science connected to the biochemical process and diseases
of organisms.

11. Environmental Science: Science related to the environment.
12. Marine Biology : Science related to marine living bemgs.
13. Forestry: Science related to forest, management and conservation of its resources.

14.Biotechnology: Science associated with the technology of uses of organisms
for the benefit of mankind.

15, Pharmacy: Science dealing with the technology and industry of medicine.
16. Wildlife: Science related to wild animals.

17. Bioinformatics: Biological information based on computer technology, for
example information on the analysis of cancer.
6 Biology

Individual Activity

Activity: Look at the pictures below, and classify them in a list under the
biological branch they belong to.

Figure : 1.01 Examples of different branches of Biology

@) Individual Activity

Activity : Collect news on biology from daily newspaper/magazine and make a
list on the branches of biology.

Essentials: Daily newspaper/magazine, scissor/cutter, glue, art paper, sign pen.

Procedure: Divide the students into small groups of 3-5 members. Each group
will look for news related to more than one branch of biology in newspapers/
magazines and make a list of physical and applied branches related to biology.

Then the group will present the poster with the paper cutting and the list of

branches written below it.

1.3 Classification of living beings

About four million different plant species and thirteen million of animal species
have been named and described till today. This number is not yet final, because the
more and more new species are being added to it almost every day. It is assumed
that the number will reach a crore in future when the description of all the
organisms will be ended. A large number of organisms are needed to be grouped
systematically to know, understand and learn them in an easy manner. Many
years back natural scientists felt the necessity to classify living world

2023
2025

following a natural system. From this necessity, a distinct branch of biology,

taxonomy, had emerged. The main aim of classification is to know the vast
and diverse living world accurately and classify them quickly and easily.

The contribution of Swedish naturalist Carolus Linnaeus (1707-1778) in the
field of taxonomy is worth mentioning. In 1735 he received his doctoral degree
in medicine from the University of Uppsala, and in 1741 he was appointed
Professor of Anatomy in the same University, It was the main field of his intense
interest to classify organisms from his botanical and zoological observations that
he assembled from his many expeditions. He classified living world into two
kingdoms- Plant and Animal by observing the characteristics of numerous
sample organism.

Aim of Classification

The aim of classification is to acquire knowledge of the groups and subgroups of
organisms, to maintain documentation of the accumulated information
systematically, to present the knowledge concisely, to take steps to identify the

organisms and be conscious to conserve the useful organisms for the well-
being of the living world.

Living World

From the time of Carolus Linnacus up to the middle of the twentieth century, all
living organisms were classified in one of the two kingdoms: Animals and Plants.
With the progress of science, on the basis of data

collected from time to time, for instance, the type Spc kinda | Kingdem-1
of DNA or RNA ina cell, features and number of (Stee =
cell in a living body and mode of nutrition that a | tieg wast Kingeom 2
cell adopts, a five-kingdom classification was —
proposed by RH.Whittaker in 1969, Then Pte fh oe
Margulis introduced a modified and expanded —
form of Whittaker's classification in 1974. She oy
divided the whole living world into two i.
super-kingdoms and grouped the five kingdoms gure

under these two super-kingdoms.
(a) Super kingdom-1: Prokaryotae

These are primitive, prokaryotic (having no structured distinct nucleus) and

microscopic unicellular organisms.
Kingdom- I: Monera
Characteristics: These are mostly
unicellular, filamentous (Filament ts
constituted by vertically connected cells
one after another) or colonial. Though
chromatin matertal is present, there is no
nuclear membrane or nucleolus in their
cells. No plastids, mitochondria,
endoplasmic reticuli are there, but
ribosome is present. The cell divides
through a process of binary fission. Their

a b
Figure : 1.02 (a) Bacteria (hb) Nesroc (Blue
green algae)

chief mode of nutrition is absorption, though some of them produce food through

photosynthesis.

Examples: Bacteria, blue green algae.

(b) Super kingdom-2: Eukaryota

These are eukaryotic (well structured nucleus), unicellular or multicellular and

live individually or in a colonial form.

Kingdom-2 : Protista

Characteristics:
multicellular,

filamentous and the nuclei in their cells are well
structured, Their cells contain nuclear materials
covered by a nuclear membranc. In the
chromatin material, there is DNA, RNA and
protein. All types of cell organelles are present.
Their modes of nutrition are absorption,
ingestion or photosynthesis. They accomplish
their asexual and sexual reproduction by the
process of mitosis and conjugation (Union of two
gametes which are structurally similar but
biologically different) respectively. No embryo

Figure: 1.03 {a} Aovnebo (b) Diatom
(Unicelitar alge)

They are unicellular or
individual, colonial or

is developed in them,
Examples: Amoeba, Paramecium and algae
(diatom, Spyrogypra etc).

g
By
Kingdom-3 : Fungi

Characteristics: Most of them are
terrestrial, saprophytic or parasitic.
Their body is constituted of a single cell
or mycelium (narrow tape-like part).
The nucleus is well organised. The cell
wall is composed of chitin. Their mode
of nutrition is absorption. The
photosynthetic apparatus chloroplast is
absent. They reproduce by haploid
spores, and their cells divide through
mitotic cell division.

Examples: Yeast, Penicillium, Mushroom etc.
Kingdom-4: Plantae

Characteristics: They are photosynthetic
and eukaryotic. Advanced tissue systems
ate found in them. They develop embryos
and diploid stage starts from it. They are
mostly terrestrial but there are also many
aquatic species in this kingdom. Their
sexual reproduction which is happened
by union of structurally and physically
different gametes.

Figure 1.04: (a) Peniciffiam (b) Mushroom

Figure 1.05: Jackiruit Tree (Angiosperm)

They are archegoniates (plants with female reproductive organs) and flowering plants.

Examples: Advanced green plants.

Divisions of plantae are shown in a chart below:

plantae
+
+ L
Bryophyta Pteridophyta
(Non-vascular plant) (Vascular plant)
Namely: Moss +
4 + +
|Fern| |Gymnosperm | | Angiosperm |

Forma-02, Biology Class-9-10
10 Biology

Kingdom-5: Animalia
Characteristics: They are eukaryotic and multicellular animals. Their cells do
not have non-living cell walls. plastids or vacuoles in them. As there are no
plastids in their cells. they are heterotrophs, and so they depend on
other organisms for their food. After "eal
ingestion, they digest their food. They
have advanced and complex tissue
systems. Sexual reproduction is their
usual way of reproduction. Haploid
gametes are usually produced in the
reproductive organs of mature and
diploid males and females. Embryonic
layers are developed at the time of their
embryonic development.

Figure: 1,06 Royal Bengal Tiger
Examples: The entire invertebrate and vertebrate animals except protozoan.

Thomas Cavlier-Smith from Oxford University divided the kingdom Protista of
living world into two groups, protozoa and chromista and renamed the kingdom
Monera as the Kingdom of Bacteria in 2004. In this way, he erouped the living world
into six kingdoms. You will learn more about it at your higher level of education. You
will be introduced gradually in the consequent chapters to the characteristics of
the animals of different. kingdom mentioned here.

1.4 Dilferent steps of Classification
In classifying the organisms, codified units or ranks are used in taxonomy,
which are called Taxa. The largest classification rank is kingdom, and the
smallest classification rank is species. Each rank of taxonomy adds new
characteristics to those of the lower rank.The higher the rank, the lower the
number of characteristics, and the higher number of living organisms belonging
to this rank the lower the rank, the higher number of characteristics, and the
number of living beings belonging to this rank. There are seven main taxonomic
ranks according to International Code.
Kingdom
Phylum / Division

Class
Order

Family
Genus
Species

2025
£23

The topmost rank is a set whereas the lower ranks are subsets. The subset of
Kingdom is Phylum, the subset of Phylum is Class, the subset of Class is Order...
etc. This system of scientific classification is called ‘nested hierarchy’. In order

to avoid repetition, the common characteristics of the previous rank are often not
mentioned in the next rank. If we follow the above mentioned system, the
taxonomic rank of human being (home sapience) is like this:

Kingdom: Animalia (cells with distinct nucleus, multicellular, heterotrophs and have
complex tissue system).

Phylum: Chordata (possess notochord in any one phase of life).

Class: Mammalia (feed their young on milk and their body is covered with hair).
Order: Primate (hands with five fingers suitable to grasp and vision more
developed than sense of smell).

Family: Hominidae (similarity with chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan).

Genus: Homo (brain is bigger compared to the body and can walk erectly on
two feet).

Species: Home sapience (wide and high forehead, skull is thinner compared to
other species, more intelligent),

As a student of biology, one needs to know the reasons for including a species in
the respective taxonomic rank though in the traditional system, the reasons are
not written separately.

1.5 System of Binomial Nomenclature

The scientific name of an organism has two parts. The first part of the name
denotes the genus to which the species belongs; the second part identifies the
species within the genus. The scientific name of potato is Solanum tuberosum,
for example. Here, the words solanwm and tuberosum denote the genus and
species names of potato respectively. This system of scientific naming of an
organism is termed binomial nomenclature. The am of binomial nomenclature
is to unambiguously identify every organism. The scientific naming of an

organism is accomplished in accordance with some rules and regulations
o)

set internationally. The scientific name of a
plant and an animal should be accorded with
the declared principles of International
Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN)
and International Code of Zoological
Nomenclature (ICZN) respectively. In fact,
the codes are documented in a printed form.
As the scientific naming of an organism is
expressed in the language Latin, these names
are accepted throughout the whole world.
In 1753 the Swedish naturalist Carolus
Linnaeus laid the foundations for the Figure 1.07 : Carolus Linnaeus
modern system of naming organisms and effectively began the task with his
book Species Plantarum. He defined the term species and genus, and used the
ranks of classification class, order, genus and species in his work. The
introduction of the formal system of naming organism by Carolus Linnaeus is

undoubtedly a striking step in the history of biology. Some of the notable
principles of binomial nomenclature are mentioned below:

1. The language of scientific naming of an organism would be Latin. (Young
zoologist Sazid Ali Haoladar recently discovered a frog which can be found
only in Dhaka. The scientific name given to the frog is Zakerana dhaka. The
name of the Genus is given as Zakerana to show respect to the founder of the
Zoology Department of Dhaka University, Kazi Zaker Hossain.

2. Every scientific name should have two parts and the genus name always comes
first, followed by the species name. For example, Labeo rvhita. This ts the scientific
name of ruhit fish. Here Laheo is genus whereas rohita is the name of the species.

3. The scientific name of any organism should have to be unique because a same
legitimate name cannot be used for naming two distinct organisms.

4, The first alphabet of the first name would be in capital letter with the
remaining alphabets in small type, and the second part of the name totally would
be with small letters. For example, Onion- Allin cepa, Lion - Panthera leo.

3. At the time of printing of a scientific name, it should be written in italics.
Rice- Oryza sativa, Katla fish- Catia catla, for example.

2025
2025

6. When a scientific name is handwritten, its two parts should be separately
underlined. For example, Oryza sativa, Catla catla.

7. Ifthe scientific name of an organism is named by several scientists, the earliest
legitimate name given by the first scientist will be accepted in accordance with

the rules of priority.

8. The scientist who gives the scientific name of an organism can have his/her
name cited in abbreviated form at the end of the binomial name along with
the year of naming. For example: Homo sapiens L.,1758, Oryza sativa L.,1753,

(Here L is the short form of Linnaeus).

Binomial names of some organisms

General name

Rice

Jute

Mango

Jackfruit

Water lily

China rose

Causal organisms of cholera
Causal organisms of malaria
Cockroach

Honey bee

Tish

Asian toad

Oriental Magpie-Robin
‘Tiger

Human

Scientific name

Oryza sativa

Corchorus capsularis
Mangifera indica
Artocarpus heteraphyllus
Numphaea nouchall
Hibiscus rosa-sinensis

Vibrio cholerae
Plasmodium vivax
Periplaneta americana
Apis indica

Tenualosa ilisha
Duttaphevaus melanostictus (Bufo melanostictus)
Copsychus saularis
Panthera tigris

Home sapiens

grasshopper. What name will you give it? Show logic of the nomenclature.

| Activity : Suppose in your locality you have discovered a new species of '
(?) Exercise

1.What is the significance of learning biology ?

2.Write down the names of the physical branches of biology.
3.Write down the names of the applied branches of biology.
4.What is binomial nomenclature ? |
5.What are the ranks of classification.

1. In which branch of biology discusses about insects?
a. Entomology b. Ecology
c. Endocrinology d. Microbiology
2, The aim of classification is-
ito know about the sub-ranks of organism
ii.to be able to name the unils of organism
iii.to present the information m detail

Which one of the following is correct?
a.i& iil boi &ii
¢, ii & iti d, i, ii & iii

Look at the stem and answer the questions 3 & 4.

3. What is the name of the organism shown in the picture above?
a. Amoeba b. Diaton
c. Paramecium d. Acterium

2025
2025

The characteristics of the organism shown in the stem are-
i, They are able to move
ii. They are unable to produce food

1. Their nucleus is well-structured

Which one of the following is correct?
a.i& ii b. ai & tii

ci & til Ge i, it & iti

® Creative question

S »

Bo

Figure-| Figure-2

What are the units of classification?
Why is genetics called the physical branch of biology?
How will you maintain continuity in naming the plant in Figure-27

Analyse with reasons which organism is more advanced between
the two shown in Figure-| and figure-2.
