Chapter Ten
Static Electricity

If you comb your hair in winter and then hold the comb near some small pieces
of paper, you will notice that the pieces jump towards the comb. Again during
storm, flashes of lightning and thunder bolts rumble and shake up the whole
area. Static electricity is responsible in both the cases. Everything around us
consists of molecules and atoms the nucleus is the center of an atom and the
electrons revolve around the nucleus. An electron is negatively charged and a
nucleus is positively charge. If one or more electrons can be separated in any
way, static electricity is produced. We will discuss the various processes of static
electricity in this chapter. We will moreover know how force acts between two
charges when they are kept near to each other.

2025
2025

Static Electricity 271

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

explain the basic causes of production of charge on the basis of the
structure of atoms.
explain the causes of production of charges by induction and friction.

detect the nature of the charge by an electroscope.

measure the electric force by applying Coulomb’s law.

explain the causes of production of an electric field.

explain the direction of electric lines of force that can represent the
direction of the electric field.

explain the electric potential.

explain the function of capacitors to preserve electrical energy.
explain the usage of static electricity.

explain the strategy to keep safe from the risk of static electricity.
272 Physics

10.1 Charge

If you comb your hair in winter and then hold the comb near some small pieces
of paper, you will notice that the pieces jump towards the comb. In cold
countries during winter air is very dry. When babies crawl on carpet, their hair
seems to stand straight and it seems one hair is pushing the other. All of you have
seen thunder bolts during stormy night and observed how flashes of lightning
comes towards the earth.

In the attraction of paper, repulsion of hair or thunder bolt- the basic thing behind
these three phenomena is charge. To know what charge is and why charges
attract or repulse or create thunder bolts, we have to understand the basics, we
have to know how atoms and molecules are formed.

We all know everything is made of an atom and molecule. There are 118
atoms in this world, among which 83 are stable, only with these atoms millions
of different molecules are formed. Water is made of two hydrogen and a oxygen
atom, a sodium atom and a chlorine atom forms table salt, a carbon with four
hydrogen atoms form the cooking gas, etc. (You need not be surprised, there are
only 50 letters in Bengali, with these alphabets thousands of words are built!)

Atom is the building block of everything. Nucleus is the center of an atom and
electrons revolve around the nucleus. The nucleus consists of a proton and a
neutron. A proton is positively charged while a neutron is chargeless and an
electron is negatively charged. The charge of a proton and electron is equal but
opposite and the magnitude of this charge is 1.6 x 10°° coulomb. In an atom
generally there are the same number of electrons and protons and so an atom is
charge neutral. Hydrogen is the simplest atom. The nucleus of hydrogen atom
consists of only one proton and only one electron is revolving around it. The
next atom is helium which consists of two protons in the nucleus (and two
chargeless neutron) and two electrons outside the nucleus. In this way larger
atoms are formed. Excluding hydrogen atom, we can say the number of protons
that a nucleus there is at least the same number or generally more than this
number of neutrons present.

Electrons outside the nucleus do not revolve in the same orbit. As shown in
figure 10.01, electrons on filling up one orbit go to the next orbit. Electrons in
orbits close to the nucleus are strongly bound, but for some atoms electrons in
the outer orbits can be separated with a little effort. Ionization is a process of
removing the electrons.

2025
Static Electricity 273

Normally atoms are charge neutral and that means there are an equal number of
electrons and protons in an atom. But if an electron is removed from the
outermost orbit, then the number of protons is more than the electrons and the
atom is not electrically neutral anymore, the amount of positive charge within it
increases. If one electron is removed, one positive charge is developed in the

atom, if two electrons are removed,

two positive charges are developed.

We then say that the atom has been

ionized or charged. As an atom is Electron
positively ionized, it can also be
negatively ionized or charged. That
is, when one or more isolated
electrons are attached to an atom,
then the total charge of the atom is
negative.

The electrons of an atom revolve
around its orbit; there are certain
tules about how the electrons will be
distributed in the orbits. You have Nucleus
learnt this elaborately in your

chemistry book. So we will not go

deeper. You know sometimes in the Figure 10.01: An atom of argon. Electrons
last orbit, there are one or two fill up one orbit and then other orbits

electrons that are nearly free; in such
materials electrons can make
movement very easily within the
materials. We call these materials

electric conductors. Again, there are some materials within which there are no
electrons that can move freely, in these materials electrons are tightly bound.
These are called nonconductors. Metals like gold, silver, copper etc. are good
conductors of electricity. Wood, plastic, glass, rubber etc. are nonconductors of
electricity.

If we have understood the topics explained so far about the structure of atoms,
the next topics following static electricity will be very easy to understand.

Forma-35, Physics, Class 9-10
274 Physics

10.2 Static Electricity by Friction

If a glass rod is rubbed by a piece of silk, (Figure 10.02) electrons start to move
from the glass to the silk. So the glass rod is positively charged and the silk
negatively. This happens because silk has more affinity for electrons than the
glass. Again if a plastic is rubbed using a flannel ( or wool), electrons will move
to plastic from the flannel. Because plastic has more affinity for electrons than
the flannel.

plastic

Figure 10.02: If glass is rubbed with silk and a plastic is rubbed with flannel
positive and negative charges can be produced,

Now we can do an experiment. Suppose, using glass and silk we have positively
charged two pieces of glass. If we carefully hang one piece of glass with
insulator silk and then bring the other close to it then we will notice that the glass
that is hanging is going away due to repulsion (Figure 10.03).

Similarly if we charge negatively two pieces of plastic and hang one of them
with silk thread and bring the other near to it, we will see the same result, one is
repelling the other. Now if we bring the positively charged glass rod near to the
negatively charged plastic rod, then we will see, they will attract one another.

When we learnt gravitational force, there was only one type of mass, so only one
type of force, and it was attraction. Because there is only one type of mass, there

is nothing called a negative mass. Now we see there are two types of charges
and so forces are of two types, sometimes attractive, and sometimes repulsive.

N
S
AN
2025

Static Electricity 275

If we have done the experiment properly, we will find that similar charges
repulse each other and opposite charges attract each other.

$p

Figure 10.03: Like charges repulse each other and unlike charges attract each
other.

10.3 Electrical Induction

At the beginning of this chapter it was said that if you comb your hair and then
hold the comb near some small pieces of paper, you will notice that the pieces of
paper jump towards the comb. The comb is attracting the pieces of paper. We
know that negative charge has been gathered in the comb and due to this reason
the comb is attracting the pieces of paper. But there is a slight complexity.We
know opposite charges attract each other, so to attract the pieces of paper
opposite charge of the comb has to be created in the paper. Since we know the
pieces of paper have no charge, then why is the comb attracting them?

This happens due to a process called electric induction. If charge is
accumulated in glass or plastic and brought near a neutral body, then charge will
be produced in the neutral body. To explain it, a metal sphere is shown in Figure
10.04 and kept on a non-conducting stand. Now if positive charge is
accumulated in a glass rod by rubbing it carefully with silk, and this is brought
near the sphere, negative charges of the sphere will come closer due to attraction
and positive charges will move away towards the back portion of the sphere.
Now the glass rod is positively charged and the part of the sphere near the glass
rod is negatively charged, so they will attract each other.
276 Physics

Now we will understand the phenomenon of attraction of paper by the comb.
When a negatively charged comb is brought near the pieces of paper, then the

Figure 10.04: If a charged body is brought near to a chargeless body, opposite
charge is induced.

part of the paper closer to the comb is induced with a positive charge, while
negative charge is induced in the farther parts. The positively charged part of the
paper is attracted by the comb and the negatively charged part of the paper is
repulsed by the comb. But as the positively
charged part is closer to the comb, the attraction
is more than the repulsion. As a result, the
pieces of paper jump towards the comb, being
attracted by the comb. (Figure 10.05)

Another thing happens then which you may
have noticed yourselves. Pieces of paper which
jump to the comb and attach to the comb
almost immediately fall away.

You may understand the reason of this too. If
the piece of paper gets attached to the comb due
to attraction, then it does not stay induced

. : Figure 10.05: During
anymore. It itself becomes accumulated with winter, combing hair and
negative charge by obtaining negative charge the comb is hold near the
from the comb. As a result it gets repulsed by pieces of paper, they feel
the comb and falls down . You can do the attraction.

experiment.

2025
2025

Static Electricity 277

If water vapor is present in the air, the accumulated charge gets lost quickly. As
a result, these experiments of static electricity work well in winter.

Example

Question: Suppose there are two metal spheres. Is it possible to create two types
of charge in the two spheres with a positively charged glass rod?

Figure 10.06: It is possible to induce different charges in two spheres in contact.

Answer: As shown in Figure 10.06, it is possible to induce different charges in
two spheres and separate them.

We have talked about three different phenomena at the beginning of this chapter.
You have understood by now why they happen.

The event of the comb has been explained. The crawling of the little baby is also
easy to understand. Due to friction with the carpet, charge accumulates in its
body and spreads to the hair also. All hairs have same charge. We know similar
charge repulses, so each hair repulses each other and becomes straightened. Now
we can explain the event of the thunderbolt too. Due to friction among clouds,
charge gets separated. When a large amount of charge is accumulated in the
clouds, it creates induction of opposite charge below. Sometimes that is so large
in amount, it becomes connected with the clouds by piercing the air. We call this
lightning. (Figure 10.07).
278

10.3.1 Electroscope

Physics

An electroscope is a wonderful equipment for test of static electricity. The

equipment is very simple. To determine
the presence of charge, it contains two
light leaves of gold, aluminum or some
other metal. These two leaves are connect-
ed to a metal disc by a highly conducting
rod. The whole setup is kept inside a glass
bottle with a nonconducting stopper so
that it can be seen from outside, but air or
anything else cannot touch the light metal
leaves.

Charging the electroscope

If a glass rod is rubbed by silk, positive
charge is accumulated in the rod. Now if
the glass rod touches the metal disc of the

Figure 10.07: When a large amount
of charge comes down to ground
from clouds, we call it lightning.

electroscope, some charge will immediately go to the disc. As the disc is
connected with the metal rod and the leaves, the charge will spread
everywhere. When similar charges appear in the gold leaves, the leaves will

repulse each other and create a gap
between them.

Similarly, if a comb is rubbed with
flannel, negative charge will accumulate
in the comb. Now if this comb touches the
disc, negative charge will spread up to the
gold leaves and they will repulse each
other and create a gap.

Determining the Nature of Charge

If charge is accumulated in an object, we
can determine whether it is positive or
negative using an electroscope. At first,
we have to give some known charge to the
disc of the electroscope. If we create
a positive charge in the glass rod by

2025
2025

Static Electricity 279

rubbing it with silk and then touch it to the disc, the reduction of gap between the
leaves will indicate the electroscope has negative charge. If the gap increases,
then it will indicate the presence of positive charge.

Induction of Charge

We can determine if an object contains charge without touching the disc. Let us
imagine, a positively charged rod is brought near the disc. Then the disc will
have negative charge due to induction (Figure 10.08). To make induction of
negative charges, negative charge from other parts of the electroscope will have
to come in the disc and as a result positive charge will be created in the gold
leaves too. This positive charge will push gold leaves apart.

Instead of bringing a positively charged object, if we bring a negatively charged

object, then there will be gap too between the gold plates. This time it will be due
to accumulation of negative charges there.

10.4 Electric Force

We have seen earlier that opposite charges attract each other and similar charges
repel each other. But we do not

know yet how attraction or

repulsion works. To know this, we r

need to look at Coulomb's law. qy Ip
Coulomb determined how much
force works between two charges.

Figure 10.09: The force F acting

We have already seen such a law, between two charges q, and q,, can
Newton's gravitational force law, either be attractive or repulsive.
which is as follows:
mm
F=CG i” 2
r

The interesting thing is, if mass ml and m, is replaced by q, and q,, we get
Coulomb's law. G was the constant for gravitational force, now we will use the
280 Physics

constant k. This is the difference. That is, if two charges q, and q, are placed ata
distance r, the force (Figure 10.09) working between them will be,

192

Fak

Here the unit of the two charges g, and g, is C and of distance (or r) is m, so we
may say, the unit of k will be Nm’/C’, so that the unit of F becomes N.
The value of k:

k =9 x 10? Nm2/C?

Coulomb is the unit of charge. We will see in the next chapter that the flow of
charge is electricity or current, and the unit of current is ampere. If one ampere
current flows for one second, the amount of charge that flows is called one
coulomb (C).

But, the authentic way to understand the coulomb is to understand the amount
of charge of an electron or proton. Its amount is:

Charge of electron : -1.6 x 10-19 C
Charge of proton : +1.6 x 107?°C

You can see, if g, and g, both are positive or negative, then the value of F is
positive and they will repel one another. If one charge is positive and the other is
negative, then the value of F will be negative, which means the direction of the
force is changed, that is, the charges will attract one another. We have seen this
earlier and now the formula shows this too.

Example

Question: A +1 C charge and a -1 C charge are placed at a distance of 10 cm.
How much force is acting between them?

Answer: Two opposite charges will attract each other. The force acting between
them: (Figure 10.10 a)

1192

F=k—5

2025
Static Electricity 281

Here, a =1C
q2=—1C
r=10cm=0.10m
k =9 x 10° Nm?/C?
So 9x10? x1x (-1) 11
, = N=-9x1011N
(0.10)? 9x 10
ty qt 1m
@) © — % —— l= —>|
10cm , a rt
&) (3)
(a) (b)

Figure 10.10 : (a) Distance between +1C and -1C is 10cm (b) Distance
between +5C and +3C is 1m.

Question: Two charges of +5 C and +3 C are placed at a distance of 1 m. Now
a third charge +q is placed in between them, where will it not feel any force.
(Figure 10.10 b).

Answer: The +5 C charge will repel +q charge towards the right and the +3 C
charge repel towards the left. When two charges will repel by equal force, +q
charge will not feel any force.

So, (+5)q_ , G3)q
° k x2 k (1 — x)?

5(1 — x}? = 3x?
2x? —10x+5=0
_ 10+ vI00—40

4
x= 4.435 or 0.565

x

As the value of x will be between 0 and 1, so the value of x must be 0.565.
(Can you try what it would be if the value of x was 4.435?)

Forma-36, Physics, Class 9-10
282 Physics

Question: There is a proton in the center of a hydrogen atom and an electron
outside it. The charges of the proton and electron are +1.6107 C and -1.6x10"
C respectively. If the distance of the orbit of the electron from the nucleus is
0.5x10° m, how much attraction is found between them?

Answer: 4192

Fak

Here, gq, = +16 107°C
q2 = —1.6 x 10-19
k=9x 10? Nm2/C?
r=0.5x10%m

_ 9x 10° x 1.6 x 1077? x (-1.6 x 10779)
~ (0.5 x 10-8)2

The negative sign denotes there is attractive force between the proton and the electron

therefore, f N = —9.22 x 10-17.N

Question: How much charge should be stored in the earth and the moon so that
the gravitational force becomes zero and the moon goes out of its orbit?

Answer: The gravitational force acting between the earth and the moon:

Here, G = 6.67 x 1071! Nkg?m?
m = 7.35 x 1072 kg
M = 5.97 x 10 kg
r = 3.84 x 105km

_ 6.67 X 107" x 7.35 x 1022 x 5.97 x 1024

So, fF, =
(3.84 x 105)2

N = 1.98 x 10°N

2025
2025

Static Electricity 283

If an equal amount of charge is kept in the earth and moon, the repulsive force:

9 x 10° x q?

Fz = =———_.

(3.84 x 105)2

Two forces must be equal for reducing gravity by Coulomb force.
That is Fo = Fr

NC?

9x10°xq?

1.98 x 107° N = NC

~ (3.84 x 105)?

q? = 3.24 x 1027 C?
q = 5.69 x 1013 C

Therefore, the number of electrons,
q 5.69x1073¢
~e@ 1.6x10-9C
The mass of an electron is 9,11 x 10-31 kg, so the mass of all electrons:

= 3.56 x 1072

(3.56 x 1032) x (9.11 x 10-34) kg = 324 kg

So, if we can keep 324 kg electrons both in earth surface and in moon, the moon
would come out of its orbit. (The mass of a moderate cow!)

10.5 Electric Field

The force between two charges can be determined by using Coulomb's formula.
You may remember, for gravitational force, we have determined gravitational
acceleration without beginning from gravitational force separately. Multiplying
that acceleration with mass, we determine force.

In case of electric force, we can do that, we can define a new quantity called
electric field. Multiplying charge g with this, we will get the force F acting on it.
Therefore, any charge q creates an electric field around it. That electric field E

18:

q
B=k>
284 Physics

If any charge g is brought in this electric field, then it will feel F force on it and
the magnitude of F will be,

F=Eq

As force F is a vector and charge q is a scalar, so, F itself is a vector and its unit

is N/C. You will see, this topic is easier to explain with the help of electric fields.

Electric field cannot be seen, but to make it easy to understand, sometimes one
type of completely imaginary

lines are drawn, called the

electric lines of force (first ae Z
introduced by Michael NS 7\\Ne
directions. To show you, these . ; ;

are drawn in a plane (Fig Figure 10.11: Lines of force diverges from

Faraday). Our known world is
three dimensional, so the lines
10.11) positive charge and converges into negative

of force will spread in all
charge

There are some rules of

drawing lines of forces:

(a) Incase of positive charge the lines of forces emerges from positive charges,
and in case of negative charge converges into negative charges . In a specific
point, the direction of tangent line of force is the direction of electric field.

(b) The more the amount of charge, per unit volume or area the more the number
of lines of forces.

(c) The nearer the lines of force, the more the magnitude of the electric field.
(d) The lines of force of one charge never intercept the lines of force of another
charge.

In Figure 10.12 (a), the lines of force of two opposite charges are shown. You
can see, the lines of force of one charge ended up in another charge. Where the
magnitude of the electric field is higher, the number of lines of force is higher.
Also, when the figure is seen, it gives a feeling that the two charges are
attracting one another. In Figure 10.12 (b), both the charges are positive and
from the figure it can be seen that, the two charges are repelling one another. Not
only that, in the middle portion of two charges the electric field due to one
charge is neutralized by the electric field of the other. As a result the number of
lines of force is less, and there is a point in the middle where the magnitude of

2025
2025

Static Electricity 285

the electric field is zero. If both the charges were negative, then the direction of
lines of force, would change only, besides this everything would be as before.

>

Figure 10.12: Lines of force of (a) opposite charge and (b) same charge

@) Example

Question: What is the magnitude of the electric field at a distance of 10 m for 5
C charge?
Answer: We know,

q
E = ka
Here, q=5C
42 = —1.6x 10°17
r=10m
k =9 x10? Nm?/c?
So,
_9 x10°xS5

_— 8
102 N/C =4.5 x 10° N/c
286 Physics

Figure 10.13: Lines of force for +q
and -2q charge.

Question: A charge of 3 C is experiencing a force of 10 N. What is the electric
field?
Answer: We know F=qE

So, F
E=—
q
Here, F=10N
q=3C
Therefore, a F_ 10N a5 we
“gq 3C ~

Question: If there are two charges q and -2q close to each other, what will be
their lines of force?
Answer: This is shown in Figure 10.13.

2025
2025

Static Electricity 287

10.6 Electric Potential

We know that in an electric field E, a charge q experiences a force F=qE when
brought close to another small positive charge q,, it experiences a repulsive
force. Therefore, to bring a test charge q from a distance r; along a straight line,
work has to be done against the repulsive force. The closer the charge q, is
brought to charge q, the greater the repulsive force it will feel, and thus more
work must be done. According to Coulomb's law, if the distance between
charges q and q, is infinite, there will be no force acting between them.

If work W is done in bringing an extremely small positive test charge q,, at con-
stant velocity, from an infinite distance to a distance r from the charge q, then
the work done per unit test charge is called the electric potential V of charge q at
that point. The potential is expressed as:

V=V (rn) = :

For a point charge q, using Coulomb’s law, it can be shown that
=k?
V(r)=k -

Electric potential is a scalar quantity. The unit of measurement in the SI System
of Units is the Volt (V).

If the work done in bringing 1 C positive charge to a point from an infinite
distance is 1J, then the potential at that point is 1V:

Example

Question: What will be the state of the potential around a positive and a

1 Volt (v) = z= =jc7

negative charge?
288 Physics

Answer: For the equal and opposite charges equipotential lines are shown
in figure 10.15. On the left side the potential is positive and it turns negative on

the rightside by decreasing equally. Just at the center, the potential is zero.

Figure 10.15: Equipotential lines for opposite charges.

10.6.1 Potential Difference

You have likely noticed various warnings on electric lines, such as "Danger: Ten
Thousand Volts." Electric shock is a serious and potentially life-threatening
hazard; there have been many instances where careless individuals have lost
their lives due to electric shocks. If you grasp the concept of electrical potential,
you can better understand what occurs in these situations. When you encounter a
high potential and touch it, a charge will flow from that higher potential to your
body, as your body's potential is lower. The amount of charge that flows depends
on various factors within your own body.

The potential of the object you touch can be either positive or negative. In one
scenario, electrons may leave your body, while in another, they may enter
it—both scenarios represent electric current, just in opposite directions.

It's crucial to recognize that charge flows due to the difference in potentia not the
value of the potential itself. For example, a crow perched on a high-voltage elec-
tric wire does not suffer an electric shock because its potential matches that of
the wire, resulting in no difference. Similarly, workers can safely perform

2025
Static Electricity 289

tasks with bare hands on extremely high voltages, such as ten thousand or twenty
thousand volts, while suspended in a helicopter. They do not receive electric
shocks because their body's voltage aligns with that of the wire they are touch-
ing. In this case, there is no voltage difference, so no charge flows, and thus, they
remain unharmed.

This illustrates that the voltage difference is what truly matters, not the absolute
value of the voltage itself—a vital concept for everyone to understand.
However, when it comes to measuring voltage levels, it is useful to have a
specific reference voltage. In everyday life, we consider the Earth to have zero
potential. The Earth is so immense that adding or removing a small amount of
charge does not affect its potential. Consequently, all measurements are made
relative to this zero potential. You may have noticed that heavy electrical equip-
ment is consistently well-grounded (Earthing). This grounding ensures that if a
significant amount of charge unexpectedly enters the system—due to an acci-
dent, for example—it can quickly and safely discharge into the ground, minimiz-
ing the risk of harm to nearby individuals.

10.7 Capacitor

When a conductor is charged or electricity is applied to it, it attains an equipoten-
tial state. Furthermore, bringing another charged object near a conductor will
induce a charge on that conductor. The potential of a conductor depends on the
charges around it. When heat is applied to a material, the resulting temperature
change depends on its specific heat capacity. If the heat capacity is high, the tem-
perature will increase only slightly, even with substantial heat input; conversely,
a substance with a low heat capacity will experience a significant rise in tempera-
ture with minimal heat added.

Similarly, when a charge is introduced to a system of conductors, the resulting
increase in potential depends on the characteristics of that system. This charac-
teristic is known as the capacitance of the conductive system, commonly referred

Forma-37, Physics, Class 9-10
290 Physics

to as a capacitor. A capacitor with high capacitance requires a large amount of
charge to produce only a small increase in potential, while a capacitor with low
capacitance will see a significant rise in potential with just a small amount of
charge. For example, if a spherical capacitor has a capacitance C and receives a
charge Q, then its potential V is given by:

y=2
where for a metallic sphere of radius r the capacitance C is

Tr

C= k

But the most simple and
effective capacitor is made by Or
keeping two metal plates side
by side (Figure 10.16). If one
plate is charged positively LPP Preyer
and the other is charged (4

negatively, then an electric
field is developed between the
plates and energy is stored in
that electric field. For a

capacitor, if capacitance is C and voltage is V , then the energy stored in it is:

1
[rae 3tv’ ]
g
e | Example

Question: What is the amount of stored energy if 10 V electric potential is
applied to a 20uF capacitor?
Answer:

Energy =5cv? = 5x 20x 10-* x 10? J= 107 J=1myjJ

ae

Figure 10.16: Capacitor formed by
parallel metal plate .

2025
2025

Static Electricity 291

10.8 Uses of Static Electricity

We use electricity in our daily life, in industries, laboratories, educational insti-
tutions and hospitals etc. But we use current electricity (we will discuss it in the
next chapter) in almost all of these cases. But static electricity is also used in
some special cases:

10.8.1 Photocopy
All of us have used a photocopy machine now and then to copy some writing. In

this machine, light is projected on the paper which creates an image of the
writings on a special kind of roller. Static charges are created on the roller
similar to the writings on the paper. After that, the roller is brought in contact
with very fine powder like ink, and black ink is absorbed at the parts of the roller
where charges are formed. Then this ink is imprinted on a new white page. The
ink is attached very well to the paper by heating so that the ink doesn't scatter,
and the process work in this way.

10.8.2 Van de Graaff Machine

Different types of work are done with high voltage. This can be done with a Van
de Graaff machine using static electricity. Static charges are sprayed on a

rotating insulating belt, by rotating the
belt it is taken inside a metallic sphere
(Figure 10.17). A tangent (comb of
sharp needle) receives the charge from
above the belt and sends it to the
metallic sphere. We know, charge
always flows from higher potential to
lower potential. It always happens in
the Van de Graaff generator, because
inside the metallic sphere the potential metallic
is equal to the potential of the surface. sphere
The excess voltage that is created on

the belt due to the excess charge on the

belt, is always higher than the voltage belt S
of the sphere. Due to this reason, any |
charge inside the sphere goes to the
surface of the sphere. In this process,

static charge
spray

Figure 10.17: Van de Graaff Machine
292 Physics

by accumulating huge amount of charge on the sphere it is possible to develop
high potential.

10.8.3 Fuel Truck

When petrol or other fuel trucks supply fuel, then they have to be very careful so
that no electrical sparks are created suddenly which may produce a big
explosion. This may happen if static electricity is generated due to friction
between truck wheels and the road. So behind the truck, a metal chain hangs
from the tank and stays in contact with the ground. In this way, any static
electricity produced is directly transferred to the earth through the chain.

10.8.4 Electronics

In cold countries, the amount of water vapor in air is very low and the effects of
static electricity are very high. Many types of IC (Integrated Circuit) are used
while working with electronics. Some IC’s can be damaged by even a slightest
change of voltage to their pins. That is why a touch of the hand while working
with electronics can damage a valuable IC or the circuit board. For doing work
under these circumstances, the upper part of a table is connected to the ground
with a conducting wire. Simultaneously, the hands of the person working are
connected to the ground using an electrical conducting strap.

10.8.5 Lightning and Lightning Arrestor

When water vapor rises to form clouds, the negative charges (electrons) created
due to friction between water vapor are stored in the lower altitude clouds. So
naturally a shortage of electrons is developed in the higher clouds making them
positively charged. When a large amount of charge is accumulated in the clouds,
a huge spark is formed inside the clouds to return to neutral state (which we
know as lightning). Sometimes so much charge is accumulated in the clouds that

they ionize the air and literally travels to the ground. We call that a thunderbolt.
A huge amount of charge is brought to the earth during a thunderbolt. It ionizes
the air while travelling through it, so a huge amount of heat, light and sound is
produced, and such amounts of charge can cause serious harm to the places
nearby.

2025
2025

Static Electricity 293

Millions of amperes of electric current can flow during a thunderbolt and for this
flow of current, the temperature of the air can rise up to 20-30 thousand degree
Celsius which is even more than the temperature of the sun!

For this temperature we see a bluish white sparkling in the sky. Another thing
occurs due to this temperature; the air expands to a great extent and moves
outside, and in the very next moment air from the outside fills in that blank space
created. This whole thing occurs faster than the speed of sound and an incredibly
loud noise is created. When the speed of air exceeds that of sound, it is called a

shockwave. The sound of a thunderbolt is a kind of shockwave. Although the
flashing of light and sound are created at the same time, we see the light first,
since the speed of light is so much that it reaches us within the next moment. The
speed of sound is 330 m/s which means it takes 3 s for it to travel one kilometer.
That is why; we can guess the distance at which the lightning is created by
calculating how many seconds later we hear the sound of thunder. Roughly
3 seconds for a kilometer.

Since electric current flows down from the clouds during a lightning, it usually
strikes tall structures. So to protect tall buildings from thunderbolts, more than
one pointy metal needle is set up on the roof. This current is then transferred to
the ground by some heavy conducting wires. The science behind this is very
simple. We have seen earlier that when a charged object is brought near an
uncharged body, the uncharged body becomes induced by opposite charge. So
while the possibility of a thunderbolt occurs, the pointy needles become
positively charged and an intense electric field is created due to pointy needles.
The surrounding air and water vapors become ionized due to this electric field
and these rises above and neutralizes the negative charges of clouds and reduces
the possibility of being a thunderbolt. When thunder needles are kept on the roof
of a tall building they often absorb the thunderbolt and the bar carries the huge
amount of charges directly to the ground. So the current coming down from the
sky doesn’t go to the ground uncontrolled; rather it goes to the deep ground
through the heavy wire.
294 Physics

Not only thunderbolt occurs in the pointy needles, but also the needles can pass
opposite charges to neutralize the charges stored in the clouds. That is why,
when lightning arresters are installed in tall buildings, the risk of that building
being thunderstruck is reduced greatly.

10.8.6 Static Electric Color Spray

Static electric color sprays are used now-a-days to paint cars, bicycles, steel
cupboards and other metallic things. In these sprays very small particles of
colors are created and since they are charged, while getting out one particle
repels another particle and spreads out. So a large space can be smoothly painted
using spray.

To charge the color particles, the pointy head of the spray is connected with a
high potential source. The thing to be charged is connected with the opposite
potential or the earth. As the color particles are charged, they are attracted
towards the body and firmly attached with the body. Not only that, the color

particles can travel along electric lines of force and can reach the hidden corners
and create a layer of paint in there.

Q) Investigation 10.01

(— Friction and induction >)

Objective: To create charges from friction and induction
Apparatus: Comb, aluminium foil.

Theory: While combing hair in winter, negative charges get stored in
the comb.

Working Procedure:

1) Take a very small piece of aluminium foil and roll it into a ball.

2) After combing the hair, bring the comb close to the aluminium foil
ball. If enough negative charges are accumulated on the comb, it will
induce a positive charge at the front side of the ball. (Since aluminium
foil is a conductor, the electrons in front will easily move back.) The
front side will be attracted by the comb and the ball will jump and

\_ stick to the comb. ~

2025
2025

Static Electricity 295

3) Again since the aluminium foil is a conductor, negative charges will
get absorbed immediately and will fall down being repelled by the

comb.
(?) Exercise
General questions

1. There is a minimum value of charge; this is 1.6x10°°C, is there a similar min-
imum value of mass?

2. Why is it that static electricity experiments don’t work properly during rainy
season?

3. Can you give equal and opposite charges to two similar metallic spheres
without touching them?

4. If capacitance is compared to a container, then what should potential be
compared to?

5. Is it possible for a point to have zero potential but non-zero electric field?

6. Explain the phenomenon of charging a body based on the basis of structure of
atom.

7. Describe how a body can be charged by the process of friction.
8. What is electrostatic induction?
9. What is inducing charge and induced charge?

10. Describe how a body can be charged by the process of electrostatic
induction?
296 Physics

11. Describe the construction of a gold leaf electroscope.

12. Describe how a gold leaf electroscope can be charged positively.

13. How can the nature of charge of a charged body be determined by a gold leaf
electroscope?

14. What are the factors on which the electrostatic force between two charges
depends?

Mathematical questions

1. 4C and -1C charges are kept 1 m apart. At which point of the line joining
them, is the magnitude of the electric field zero?

2. An electron in a hydrogen atom revolves around the nucleus due to Coulomb’s
force. The mass of electron is 9.11x10*! kg and proton is 1.67107’ kg and for
this there is also a gravitational force between them. Which of these two forces
is greater and by how much?

3. Draw the electric lines of force for the two charges mentioned in question
number 1.

4. Equipotential lines for opposite charges are shown in Figure 10.15, show
electric field from there.

5. Electric field for two charges is shown in Figure 10.13, draw the potential.

\o> , .
Multiple choice questions
P 4

Choose the correct answer

1. The name of the apparatus used to determine the presence of charge is —
a) Ammeter b) Voltmeter
c) Microscope d) Electroscope

2025
Static Electricity

2. On which factor does the electrostatic force between two charges

i) the distance between the charges

ii) the nature of the medium in which the charges are placed
iii) the masses of the charges

Which one of the following is correct?

a) i and ii b) iii

c) ii and iii d) i, ii. and iii

3. The unit of electric field intensity is-

a) N b)Nm

c)Nm! d)NC!

4. Volt is the unit of what?

a) electric field b) electric potential
c) electric charge d) electric current

5. In Figure 10.18

i) some charges will flow from

sphere Ato sphere B

ii) some charges will flow from

sphere B to sphere A

iii) the charge difference remains same

Which one of the following is correct? Figure 10.18
a)i b) ii
C) iii d) i. ii. and iii

Creative questions

297

not depend?

1. Rima, after combing her hair, observes that her comb attracts small pieces of
paper. Shima says that it happens because the comb is positively charged. Rima
says that the comb is charged negatively. To solve the problem, Rima and Shima

look for their physics teacher and find him in the physics laboratory. Hearing
everything he asks them to find the nature of the charge with the help of an

electroscope.

Forma-38, Physics, Class 9-10
298 Physics

(a) What do you mean by charge?

(b) Explain why an object is charged by friction?

(c) Describe why the comb is charged?

(d) Explain how the nature of charge of the comb can be determined by the
electroscope.

2. 9,(2C), 4,s(-1C) and g,(1C) are three charges placed on a straight line

sequentially and equidistant from each other.
rag 1m -1C 1m 1¢

qy q2 q3

(a) What is electric force?

(b) Why are electric field and electric field intensity not the same?

(c) Draw the lines of force produced by three charges.

(d)What should be the magnitude of charge q, be, so that charge ¢, will not feel
any force on it? Explain.

2025
