Chapter Twelve
Heredity in Organisms and Biological Evolution

A jieture showing comparison among the skulls of human, orangoulang and macaque monkey

Structural and behavioural traits from both the parents, mother and father, are
passed to the offspring generation after generation. We will learn in this
chapter how traits from both the parents are transmitted to the offspring. We
will also learn about the existing classes in the living world, which emerge
from their ancestors through evolution, and express their visible form of

present existence.

Forma-32, Biology Class-9-10
explain the concept of heredity;

describe the components containing the behavioural materials obtained
through generations;

explain the transmission of behavioural characteristics from generation to
generation ;

explain the replication of DNA;

explain the role of DNA in transferring heredity materials:

explain the necessity of DNA tests;

explain the role of a male in determining the gender of an offspring;

explain the causes and results of genetic disorders:

explain the cenception of the biological evolution;

describe the natural selection theory of biological evolution;

explain the significance of biological evolution in the survival of species;
determine the differences between the similar and dissimilar features of the
mother and father;

conceive the roles of DNA test in our life.

2025
£23

12.1 Heredity in organism

All the organisms in the world are characterized with their own unique features.
Features of individual organisms pass to the next generations and evolve in them.
This natural principle is applied to all organisms in the world. This is why rice
plant grows from rice seed, mangoes [rom their seeds, jute does also this the same
way, This way the characteristics of species are maintained in offspring through
generations. Heredity is the passing of traits from father and mother to their
offspring through generations. In depth discussions and research concerning
heredity are done in the special branch of biology called genetics.

Activity: Identify the similar and dissimilar traits from your parents and
_ place them in a chart with a nice presentation.

r

12.1.1 Components carrying (heredity materials) behavioural features to
the offspring from generation to generation

The features of parents are transferred to their offspring through heredity materials.
These are chromosomes, genes, DNA and RNA. These are discussed below:

Histone

DMNA helix

Figure: 12.01 Location of Chramosome in Nucleus

(a) Chromosome: The main heredity material is the chromosome. It is spread in
the nucleoplasm of a nucleus as a thread like structure named the chromatin. The
scientist Strasburger first discovered the chromosome in 1875. Across species,
the number of diploid set of chromosomes (two sets chromosome, one set from
the father and the other set from the mother) may be 2 to 1600. In length a
chromosome may be from 3.5- 30.00 microns (1 micron =1/100 nim) and in width
0.2 to 2.0 microns. The function of chromosomes is to carry genes (which
control the characteristics of organisms) to the offspring from the parents.
Colours of human eyes, nature of hair, compositions of skin etc. continue intact
through the flow of heredity carried by chromosomes. This is why chromosomes
are designated as the physical basis of heredity.

(b) DNA : The main component of a chromosome is deoxynbonucleic acid
(DNA). It is usually a double stranded spiral structure of polynucleotides. One
strand is complementary to the other. In it there are five carbon sugars, nitrogen
bases (adenine, guanine, cytosine, thymine) and inorganic phosphate.

Figure : 12.02 DNA

2025
2025

These three components collectively are called a nucleotide. DNA is a stable
substance in a chromosome. In 1953 American scientist Watson and British
scientist Crick first described the double helical structure of DNA and for this
contribution both of them won the Nobel Prize. Nitrogen bases are of two types. a
purine and a pyrimidine. Adenine (A), guanine (G) are purines and cytosine (C)
and thymine (T) are pyrimidines. The Adenine of one strand bonds with the
thymine of another strand by two hydrogen bonds, and guanine of a helix connects
with a cytosine of another helix by three hydrogen bonds. This bond is always
developed between a purine and pyrimidine. So, a strand of DNA is
complementary to another strand but not identical to it. A complete twist in a helix
is 344° long and in a complete twist, there are ten nucleotides. So,the length
between the two adjacent nucleotides is 3.4A° (from top to bottom). The two
strands of polynucleotides in DNA are positioned antiparallelly. It looks like rungs
in a twisted ladder. The bases are connected flatly and horizontally in position
from the main axis. The external two strands or two axes of DNA are
composed of consecutive arrangements of sugar and phosphate. and internal
nitrogen bases are plaimly aligned. In fact, DNA is a precise thread, but in a
prokaryotic cell DNA is usually circular and the surface area would be a few
microns to centimeters. It is composed of thousands of nucleotides and the
diameter of the twisted helical structure everywhere is 20A°. DNA is the main
component and chemical carrier of heredity. DNA is the true structure and carrier
of the behavioural characters of organisms, and it directly carries the
characteristics of parents to their offspring from generation to generation.

Activity : To develop a DNA model,

Required equipment: Iron wire - 1 meter, 2 used ball point pen,40 beads
of 1.5 em diameter, 7-8 drinking straw, Coloured paper (Red, blue, yellow
and green), Glue, Scissors, One (empty) shoe box.

Procedure

1. To build this model, 40 beads of 1.5 cm diameter are needed. If beads are
not available they can be made from dough. Dough can be prepared by
mixing of | cup of flour, 42 cup of salt and little amount of water. Small balls
with holes can be made from dough and used as beads. These beads will
represent phosphate.

2. Each straw is to be cut into three equal pieces. Each piece will be nearly
8-9 cm long. 20-25 pieces are necessary which will represent nucleotides.

3. In each piece of straw, make holes in parallel, at both terminal end of the straw.
4, Cut coloured papers in nbbon like shape with 2 cm width.

5. Now from these ribbons cut down 3 cm long green paper and wrap it up
around 2 cm part of the straw starting from center to one end. In the same
way, wrap up the other side of the straw with yellow ribbon. In this way
10-12 pieces of straw are to be wrapped up with yellow and green ribbons.
The green part will represent A (adenine) while the yellow portion will
represent T (Thymine) of nucleotide. Thus each piece of straw will represent
one base pair.

Figure : 12.03 Different stages of the preparation of DNA Model

2025
2025

6. In the same way the remaining pieces of straw will be wrapped up by blue }
and red ribbons of paper. Here the blue will represent C (Cytosine) and the
red portion will represent G(guanine) The pieces of straw with red and blue
represent one base pair CG,

Tt should be remembered that yellow would be paired with green and blue with
red,

7. 1 meter long iron wire is to be cut into two pieces and tied at two ends of
the ball point pen, keeping a gap of 7-8 cm space.

8. Now insert the wires through the holes made at both ends of each piece of straw.
9. Now pull up the straw to the pen and then insert both ends of the wire
through two beads.

10. Thus insert one piece of straw and then two beads at both end
alternatively. Try to make a nice combination of base pairs while continuing
the process.

11. Afier finishing the arrangement of straw and beads through the wire, tie
the remaining ends of the wire with another ball point pen. Cut off any extra
wire, if there is any.

12. In real DNA the rotation of strands occur after every 10 base pairs. As
there are 20 base pairs, it will give two rotations. So twist the two pens to
make two full rotations along with the base pairs. This will show the model
of DNA structure (double helix),

13. Now imagine the yellow colour band as A and the green as T, in the same
way blue as C and red as G. Beads represent phosphate and the part of straw
between two beads is carbohydrate.

14, To keep the model safe, keep it in the empty shoe box by twisting the ball
pens and tying it with the side of the shoe box.

Remarks

The DNA model built in this way has 20-22 base pairs. Ovserve it from
different angles. Focus a torch on it and observe the shadow it makes. This is
important because Rosalind Franklin (1920 — 1958) tock pictures from

_ different angles by focusing X Ray. By analyzing the X-Ray photo. James _

Wilson (1928 — ull now) and Fancies Greek (1916 — 2004) discovered the )
DNA structure and won the Nobel prize for it in 1962,

Limitation

This model looks like real DNA but here the structural ratio between
_ the different molecules and chemical groups is not accurate.

(c) RNA

RNA stands for ribonucleic acid. Most
RNA has contained single polypeptide
strand, It is composed of 5 carbon ribose
sugar, inorganic phosphate and nitrogen
bases (adenine, guanine, cytosine and
uracil). In the genome of RNA virus,
RNA is found as a permanent
component or the inherited component.
In some viruses (i.e. tobacco mosaic
virus) DNA is absent. The viruses which
are not composed of DNA possess RNA
as their nucleic acid. In this situation, the
RNA setves itself as the hereditary
material.

(d) Gene

Figure : 12.04 RNA

The unit of controlling all the visible and invisible signs and characters of

organisms is called the gene. Genes are positioned throughout the chromosomes

of organisms. The location of a gene throughout a chromosome is called the

locus. For a specific characteristic, a gene is responsible. In some cases, a

characteristic is expressed through cooperative action of several genes. In other

cases, one gene controls more than one characteristic. From different research,

it is clear that a gene is the perfect master of heredity. By taking necessary

signals from DNA, RNA enters into the ribosome of the cytoplasm and
according to that signal, protein is synthesised. In the case of a eukaryotic cell this
protein (synthesised) is first deposited in the endoplasmic reticulum and then it

f025
passes through the glogi body and vesicle. Meanwhile the protein undergoes

many changes and is carried to necessary places. In the prokaryotic cell protein
directly reaches the destination. This protein determines the nature and speed of
biochemical reactions and from that, the characteristics of living organisms are
determined with respect to the environment. These characteristics include
everything from structure to the behavior of any living organism. It can be
expressed as: DNA — RNA — Protein — Characteristics.

The number of genes in different organisms is not the same. In organisms of the
same nature, the number of genes is more or less same. Genes are arranged in
common principle along side from one end to another end. Chromosomes are
separately spread from cach other in a linear form.

Different replicas (edition) of the same genes can express the same characteristic
in different levels. For example in a pea, for tallness, the height determination
gene is ‘T’ and for shortness the height determination gene is ‘t’. When Tt is
combined, it expresses its tallness. So “T’ with respect to ‘t’ is called the dominant
gene and ‘t’ with respect to ‘T’ is called the recessive gene. When in an organism
two genes are recessive, only then does the recessive gene express the recessive
characteristic. e.g., only pea plant with ‘tt’ is short in height. Different version of
ihe same gene are called alleles of that gene. Here, T and t indicate two alleles of
the gene that determine the height of peas.

To see how the characteristics or waits of parents are expressed in the next
generation (offspring) scientist Gregor Johan Mendel did some experiments with
pea plants m 1866 and discovered a valuable theory of genetics. The factor takes
the presently glamorous form known as the gene. Gregor Johan Mendel is called
the Father of genetics.

Mandel took a tall and a short pea plant and transferred pollen grain of a tall
plant into the stigma of a short plant. In the same way, he transferred the pollen
grain of a short plant into the stigma ofa tall plant. This resulted in reproduction.
He made sure that the other pollen grain would not appear. The reproduced seeds
were sowed and it was found that all the plants were tall in size and no plants

were short. Out of these plants, one was taken into reproduction through
self-pollination and the seeds were sowed. It was found that there were both tall
Forma-33, Biology Class-9-10
and short plants. Among them, 34 were tall and 44 was short.

seer Parents

em Gamete

er F, Plant (All one tall}

og]t t
li Tt | Tt
t | te | tt

som F, Plant(34 tall, 14 short)

Figure: 12.05 Experiment of Mendal's law

This theory of Mandel is applied in breeding of plants and animals. The
controlled sexual reproduction is done in plants and animals to bring about
desired characteristics. As a result, a generation with various characteristics are
produced. From this generation, desired characteristics are selected for breeding
to get plants and animals that have desired characteristics. At present, this theory
is applied largely for the production of improved variety of crops.

DNA replication
Through the process. a new DNA molecule is synthesized from an existing
molecule of DNA, DNA replicates in a hall-conservative way. Through this
process, the double stranded DNA becomes single stranded by breaking
hydrogen bonds.

2025
£23

Then the floating nucleotide ina cell creates
new complimentary strands by combining
"A" (adenine) with "T'(Thymine) 'T' with A
'C with 'G' and 'G' with 'C', Thus one of the
old strands remains and combines with a
new strand to make a complete DNA. At the
end, a new strand, combining with another
old strand, forms the structure of a molecule

of DNA. As the new DNA emerges, it has a
new and an old strand, This principle is
known as the semiconservative method. In
1956 Watson and Crick first successfully

proposed the replication process of DNA. Figure: 12.06 DNA Replication

) ina ividual Activity

| Activity: The teacher will ask the students to demonstrate a diagram of a |
| DNA afier drawing it in a big piece of paper with a pencil.

12.1.2 DNA Test

Throughout the present century, DNA technology and the significance of it in
the field of medical science, agriculture. fish and animal resources and in the
industry of medicine have introduced a new chapter on creation. In Bangladesh,
along with evidence, witness, eyewitness dependent judiciary system, DNA has
opened a new window of ensuring true justice.

A scientific and practical method of DNA test is called DNA fingerprinting. The
name DNA typing or DNA testing is also used. To perform the DNA test, the first
requirement is an organic specimen. Bone, teeth, hair, blood, saliva, semen of a
person can serve as valuable organic specimens. The profile trom the place of
occurrence of crime or the profile from the specimen of the victim of a crime ts
compared with the profile obtained from the blood or organic specimen of a
suspect.

Tn this method DNA is isolated from the sample by a chemical process and then
DNA are cut into pieces by one or more restricted enzymes. Then, through a
special method (electrophoresis by egarose or polyacrylamide gel) the pieces of
DNA are sorted according to the length
of different bands. Then, radioactive isotope

DNA prob is hybridized, keeping it on a

special nitro cellulose paper and
then putting it on an x-ray film to
determine different visible bands by
autoradiograph method. After that, the
sample is compared with DNA band
(DNA map) of the victim or suspected
person. This method is termed as finger
print method. Currently by using polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) method DNA
test is done with even a small sample for
identification without any error.

12.2 Determination of human sex

BUELL NL ED] Crime Scene

Wee DM Victim

tt iv i 1! Suspect |

pili bi @ Suspect 2
Figure 12.07; Here the band pattern
obtained from the DNA sample

collected from the crime scene exactly
muaiched that of the suspect 1, therefore
he/she must have been present at the

spot.

In human and other mammals sex is
determined in the same way, In the
cells of the human body, the number
of chromosomes is 46, Le. 23 pairs.
Among them 2? pairs (total number
44) are autosomes and the remaining

pair is the sex chromosome.
Autosomes play roles in
physiological, and embryonic

development and the formation of the
body of organisms which have no
part in determining sex. The two sex
chromosomes are marked with X and
Y. They play a significant role in
determining sex. In females, in the
diploid cells both sex chromosomes

22 pairs of autosome

yeu WY

CN unex er

| ee 4 x K

ft ode wo

=——,
f Teeage ofan, |)
| deat chromosome

) e

XK . xy J

rese of women
“ge chromagame

Figure 12.08; 22 pairs of autosome and one

pair of sex chromosome

are X i.e. XX. In males the two chromosomes one is X and the other is Y. Both
the chromosomes are long in structure, and rod shaped but Y chromosome is
shorter than the X chromosome. At the time of the development of the egg,
meiosis occurs, and every egg possesses an X chromosome along with other

chromosomes. But in case of a male at the time of the formation of sperms, half

2025
2025

the number of sperms contain an X
chromosome and other half number of
sperms contain a Y chromosome. An egg can
be fertilized with either type X or Y. Only one
sperm (X or Y) of father’s successfully
fertilized with the mother’s X bearing egg
during gestation. So the sex of the future
child depends on which sperm fertilized with
ege. So. a zygote can have both the
chromosomes as type X, or can have one X
and the other Y. The baby, which is born
having both the chromosomes as X i.e. XX.
will be a baby girl and the baby, who is born
with one chromosome of type X and the other
one of Y, will be a baby boy. In determining
sex, a mother plays no role because the
mother always produces eggs containing only
an X chromosome, On the other hand, the
father produces sperms having both the type
X and Y.

@) Individual Activity

| Activity: Determine whether a son or a daughter will be born following

the following chart.

Figure 12.09: Sex determination
process of human child by
sex chromosome

|

XK

x

On

Activity: Sex determination of bird, cricket (insect) and crocodile are

different from that of human. Investigate the sex determination process

of these animals and prepare a report on it,
12.3 Genetic disorder

In some genetic diseases, a mutation occurs in gene of sex chromosomes. These
types of diseases are called sex-linked disorder. As the size of Y chromosome 1s
comparatively short and there are less genes on it. In most cases sex-linked
disorders occur due to the mutation of the X chromosome. In female, there are
two XX chromosomes. Even if one X chromosome is affected by mutation,
symptoms of genetic disorders are never expressed as the other X chromosome
remains normal. Two X chromosomes in a female are unlikely to have the same
type of mutation. So a female is not usually affected by sex-linked disorder, but
merely acts as a carrier (the person who is not affected by sex-linked disorder but
carries the mutant gene of the sex-linked disorder is called a carrier).

In genes of male, there is only one X chromosome. So they do not act as carrier,
rather they show the symptom of sex-linked disorders directly if only the X
chromosome is affected,

(a) Colour blind or colour blindness

Colour blindness is a condition when someone
cannot properly identify colours. To identify
colours, we have pigments in our optical nerve
cells. If colour blind, the patient is deficient of
colour identifying pigments in their optical
nerve. If someone lacks a single pigment then
he would not be able to differentiate red and
green. This is the universal problem of colour
blindness. If lacking more than one pigment

; Figure 12.10 : A picture taken
besides red and green, the patient cannot fyom Ishihara chart used to

differentiate the colours blue and yellow. One indentify red-green colour
man out of ten is colour blind. In comparison, »lindnes. Tt is designed in such

near . ., away that a colour blind man
avery few number of women suffer from this idl le linia IR eibimecae

problem. a healthy man will see it 74.

2023
2025

Along with heredity, some medicines such as taking hydroxy chloroquinine for

the treatment of rheumatism triggers a side effect causing colour blindness
by disintegrating the colour pigment in the eyes. Advice from a registered
ophthalmologist can be a solution to cope with the colour blindness.

@) Individual Activity

Activity: In Picture 10,12 X' represents a
mutant of X chromosome, carrier mother

(XX’) and sex linked disorder father (X'Y) aeuhet

produce the offspring that may have the x x

probability of ratio, such as:

sex. linked disorder daughter baby(X'X") : g x) Xx XX | baby daughter

carrier daughter (X.X"): sex linked disorder es
son (X°Y): Normal sen (XY)= T:1:1:1
This ratio does not mean that if sucha couple = Figure :12.11 How sex-linked
has four children, they will definitely have one disorders (such as: red,
green colour blindness)
are transmitted lias been shown
in panet square.

¥ XY XY | baby son

sick girl, another carrier girl, another sick boy
and another normal boy! The ratio only
indicates the probability, where each of the
four possibilities can occur 25% of the tume. It
is similar te the scenario where a 1:1 probability ratio of heads to tails when tossing a
coin does not mean that every two tosses there will always be a head and a tail; rather,
every time there is a 50% chance of getting a head and a 50% chance of getting a tail.
In this same way find the ratio of offspring:

(a) Ailing father (X"¥) and healthy mother (XX)

(b) Ailing father (X"Y) and ailing mother (X"%')

(c) Healthy father (XY) and carrier mother (X"X")

(d) Healthy father (XY) and ailing mother (X'X’)

(b) Thalassemia

Thalassemia is a disease of abnormal state of red blood cells. Because of this
disease, red blood cells disintegrate. The patient suffers from anemia, This
disease genetically passes from generation to generation. In Bangladeshi
context, thalassemia is an important hereditary blood problem. It is guessed that
every year 7000 babies are born with thalassemia and at present the number of
patients may be one lakh. It is an autosomal recessive disorder. 1.e., when both
father and mother are the carrier or both are the patient of thalassemia, only then
does it dominate in the offspring. When the marriage is held between maternal
and paternal cousins or between close (blood related) relatives there is a higher
probability of giving birth to a child with thalassemia. Red blood cell consists of
two types of protein « globulin and 6 globulin. If the zene of these two types of
protein in red blood cell are defective then defective red blood cell produces, for
which thalassemia occur.

There are two types of thalassemia due to two types of gene disintegration Le.,

a thalassemia and § thalassemia.

a thalassemia is caused when a globulin production is absent or defective. This
type of disease is prevalent in South Asia, the Middle East, China and Afica, In
the same way, ff thalassemia is caused when the gene for the production of the
protein globulin is disintegrated. {i} thalassemia is also called kulir thalassemia.
This type of disease is found in the people of the Mediterranean region. Some
people having African, American or Chinese origin may also suffer from this
disease.

On the basis of the inherited gene, thalassemia is grouped into two categorigs:
thalassemia major and thalassemia minor. In case of major thalassemia, the
victim baby obtains genes from both the parents and in case of minor

f025
thalassentia a baby obtains genes either trom the father or from the mother. This
type of body does not express any sign of thalassemia but functions as a carrier

of thalassemia genes.

C)» Thalassemia gene

-R + Healhy gene

Father-healthy
but silent carrier
of thalassemia

Mother-healthy
but silent carrier
of thalassemia

QO OO
OO" ®O 00 O®

£49%

Thalassemia affected child Hesltiny but carrier of thalassemis Healthy child
(Possibility one fourth) child {Possibility two fourth) (Possibility one fourtl)

Figure 12.12: The possibility of inheriting thalassemia from carrier father
and carrier mother is one fourth.

Symptom: Due to severe thalassemia, the baby may die in the womb. Babies
born with major thalassemia may suffer from anemia just after birth. up to one
year of age.

Forma -34, Biology Class-9-10
Treatment: Thalassemia is treated by transfusing blood at regular intervals and

by providing the patient with required medicines. The patient must not eat iron
enriched fruits and medicine, as they may be accumulated and cause harm to other
body organs. If the liver is badly affected, other diseases or jaundice can be
initiated. The patient suffering from major thalassemia faces threats of life from
age 20 to 30.

12.4 Theories of biological evolution

In this world of diversity, we are familiar with many living organisms, among
which only 1.3 million are animals. Besides this, four hundred thousand
species of plants are identified. Once man had an idea that the world is
unchangeable i.e.. the shape, the volume of earth remained unchanged from its
inception. They thought that there was no difference between the primitive
and current (present) living kingdom. But in 500 BC a scientist named
Xenophanes first discovered fossils.

He proved that the living organisms are not unchangeable i.e.. there are many
changes happening between the past and the present.

In 400 BC Aristotle proved that in the living kingdom there are some species
which are more developed in comparison to other species. These developed
species adapted with changes of the environment, and came to their present
form through evolution. Generally biological evolution is a slow and continuous
process, and through this process from the structural view complex organisms

originate from simple organisms. There are also very few examples of abrupt
evolution.

According to the latest scientific data, 4.5 billion years ago, the earth was a
heated gas mass evolved from the sun. This gas mass radiated heat and
gradually became denser to a liquid state. Then the mass solidified from outer
side to the immer side and released vapour, creating cloud surrounding the
mass. Rain produced from that cloud created the sea on the solid level of the
earth. In the course of time, life originated in the sea. These lives underwent
gradual changes and resulted in today’s diverse world.

2025
£23

After many hypothetical and research based experiments, modern people
have attained the concept that evolution is the basis of the origin of lite.

Evolution comes from the Greek world “Evolveri”. The English philosopher
and educationist Herbert Spencer first used the world evolution. Once it was
thought that through slow and continuous changes a complicated and
developed species was developed from a simple and unicellular organism.
This process is known as evolution. But evolution does not always occur
slowly. sometimes it occurrs fast with environmental changes. Not only that,
sometimes complex organisms turns into sirapler ones due to evolution. The
Mexican catfish lost its eyesight when it shifted from surface water to dark caves
of deep water. So, now the definition of evolution is given by gene alleles. (One
specific gene can remain in more than one form. Then each and every form of
that gene is called its allele.) According to Curtis-Bums (1939) the modern
definition of evolution is the change of the gene allele frequency from
generation to generation within the species more or less similar in nature.

For example, a list was made after determining the genes of all the tigers of
the Sundarbans. At the same time, the number of alleles of the genes was also
counted. After some years, another list will be made by determining genes of
the next generation of tigers along with determining the alleles.

When comparing the two lists, ifitis found that there is a significant change
in the alleles then one can say that biological evolution occurs im the tiger
population.

12.4.1 Origin of life

There ate many opinions about how life originated on earth. But there is no
controversy about life originating from sea water or other water bodies. In this
regard scientists put forward logic in different ways. First, the presence of
different mineral salts in most living cells, blood and other liquid of body are

similar to that of sea water miunerals. Second, there are still simple and
unicellular organisms found in sea water.
Protozoans

Protists
Figure : 12.13 Biological evolution is a complex network of numerous changes
occurring simultaneously in various branches.

The scientific hypothesis regarding how life originated on earth is like this:
260 years ago the air of the earth was filled with a large amount of
methane, ammonia, hydrogen sulphide, water vapour, nitrogen and carbon
dioxide. There was no trace of oxygen. Due to [frequent eruptions of
volcanos, and the effect of ultra violet rays and lightenmg the atmospheric
temperature increased and the organic materials combined to produce amino
acid and nucleic acid.

2025
2025

The above process was proved by doing an experiment in the laboratory.
Nucleoprotein is produced from the combination of amino acid and nucleic
acid, Gradually the nucleoprotein attains the power of replication and thus a
life starts. The origin of earth and its consequent evolution of life is called
chemical evolution.

Tt is assumed that the nucleoprotein is produced by the chemical combination
of protein and nucleic acid. A protovirus is evolved from the nucleoprotein
and from it, a virus evolved. A virus is a state between living and non-living.
After that, bacteria were produced and later on protozoa was originated. The
nucleus of bacteria 1s primitive in nature, it is called a prokaryotic cell.

Later on, true nucleus appears in Protozoa. In some unicellular organisms,
chlorophyll is formed and as a result synthesis of food became possible and
oxygen is produced as a by product. Then the aerobic organisms increase in
number. Initiation of multicellular organisms appear from the unicellular
organisms,

After that more complex organisms began to evolve. There are many other
explanations about chemical evolution and the origin of living organisms but the
explanation given above is the most commonly accepted one.

Evolution never happens in a linear way. It has always been happening in a
complicated way in different branches. This is shown in figure 12.12.

12.4.2 Theory of Darwin or Darwinism

Charles Darwin, the British naturalist, brought a revolutionary idea to the
history of biology and science. Scientist Charles Robert Darwin (1809-1882)
was born in Shrewsbury, England. During his voyage to the Galapagos
Island in the Pacific ocean he was attracted to the amazing diversity of plants
and animals of that region and he came back to England in 1837 with a vast
collection of data and samples. Twenty years after his return 1.e., in 1859, he
expressed his opinions in a book named the 'Origin of Species by means of
Natural Selection.
It is mentionable that Darwin is not the founder of evolution but his theory is

known as the theory of evolution.

According to the discussion in this chapter, we have seen that scientists living
before Christ knew that biological evolution occurred on earth.

The success of Darwin was that he developed a mechanism based on scientific
data and proof which could explain all matters related to evolution.

Alfred Russell Wallace, (1823-1913), a contemporary British naturalist and
scientist who independently developed a theory on natural selection, also
mentioned natural selection as a cause of biological evolution. Due to some
historical reasons, Darwin's name was more popular than his.

According to Darwin, general facts about natural events

(a) Increase of generation in excessive rate: According to Darwin a general
characteristic of living beings is to reproduce its species in an excessive rate.
Due to this the number of species increases both geometrically and mathematically.
For example, one mustard plant produces 7,30,000 seeds in a year. It is possible
to get 730,000 plant from those seeds. A female salmon fish lays thirty million
eges in one breeding season.

According to Darwin, if all the elephants born from a pair of elephants would
survive, the number of elephants would be 1,90,000 ( one hundred ninety
thousand) in 750 years.

(b) Limited food and shelter: As the area is limited on earth. shelter and
food for living organisms is limited.

(c) Struggle for survival: As the number of living organisms increases both
geometrically and mathematically, having limited food and shelter, living
organisms have to face hard competition for survival, Darwin called this the
struggle for existence. Darwin noticed that living organisms had to struggle
in three stages. These are:

(i) Interspecific Struggle: For example, a frog eats an insect and a snake eats
a frog. A peacock eats both snake and frog. Thus only due to physical needs
(hunger), a cruel relationship develops among different species, where each
species plays the role of food or consumer.

2023
2025

(ii) Intraspecific struggle: As the same species has the same habitat and the
same food habits. when their number increases, they compete among
themselves for survival. For example, when in an island the number of
herbivorous animal increases, they fight for food and shelter among
themselves. The stronger animal (herbivorous) beat the weaker ones and take
the command of that area. As a result, the weaker animals die after a certain
period from starvation.

(iii) Struggle with Environment: Normal life of living organisms is
interrupted by unfavourable conditions like flood, drought, cyclone and
tornado, earthquake, volcano eruption etc. So living beings always have to
fight with these unfavourable environment to survive. Those who won the
struggle can survive, while others become extinct. For example, the koe! bird of
Mid and North America became extinct due to severe cold and snowfall.

(d) Variation: According to Darwin, two animals (or group of animals) are
never exactly the same. There are always some differences, even if in a very
small scale. The difference between the two specimens of the same species is
called variation or mutation. Variation helps living organisms to survive.

(e) Natural selection: The process through which organisms develop
through adaptation, gain more success in struggling in comparison to others,
and enjoys more advantages in competition, is called natural
selection.

1A

Figure :12.14 The chronological picture of struggle for survival between two living
organisms, Green beetles could not adjust with the environment and were easily marked
and later on consumed by birds. But brown beetles survived.
The organisms which win the competition in struggling through adaptation
are selected by nature and reproduce at a greater rate. On the other hand,
organisms which cannot adjust to the new changes cannot survive and
gradually become extinct.

According to Darwin, the organism which can survive in unfavorable
conditions by adaptation should be addressed as the fittest. Thus it can be
easily said that the fittest organism survive by winning the competition
through adaptation (Survival of the fittest).

(f) Origin of new species: Nature selects plants and animals and nourishes
them. Plants and animals that survive can cope with the changes of
the environment and are able to reproduce more than those who are unfit for
survival. The characteristics of variation are transferred generation after
generation. The generation which has the quality of environmental friendly
variation are again selected by nature. Over the years through natural
selection, plants and animals are selected and thus new varieties of species
are produced, It is not always the case that the original species is lost when a new
species arises from that ancestral species.

At present geneticists, cytologists and taxonomists following the theory on
genetics and evolution. believe that new varieties could be produced in three
different ways, such as ;

(a) Being isolated from original species population

(b) Hybridization

(c) In hybridized species the accidental increase of chromosomes (due to
polygamy) occurs during cell division and as a result, a new variety produced
can adapt with the environment and is selected by nature for survival.

Conditions for natural selection

The idea that a massive or great change must always occur for biological
evolution to occur is wrong. Just as arising of new species from ancestral
species is regarded as evolution, change in allele frequencies from generation to
generation is also evolution by definition. The first is macroevolution and the
second is microevolution. After many generations of microevolution,
macroevolution can occur, just as iny grains of sand combine to form long sand
dunes or miniscule droplets of water accumulate to give rise of large oceans.

g
By
We may understand the principles of the Darwinian evolution only by
understanding the conditions, each of which must be met in order for Darwinian
evolution to happen.

First Condition — Variation: Even if all the members of a population are of the
same species, each of them will have some individualistic characteristics that
differs. All cows are not the same, all jackfruit trees are not the same, all humans
are members of the same species, yet look how different people are, even
bacteria of the same species are not exactly the same.

Second Condition — Selection: The variation or diversity of traits that contribute
in favour of its reproduction in an environment, some of those traits are
transmitted to the next generation. All variable features can be roughly divided
into three categories.

* Fit: characteristics in favour of environmental tolerance or adaptation.

* Unfit: characteristics associated with death or failure of reproduction or
extinction due to environmental conditions.

* Neutral: characteristics unrelated to the given environment.

Tt is easily understood that organisms with fit traits have a higher chance of
survival than organisms with unfit traits.

Third Condition —Teredity: Some, but not all, fit and unfit traits will be passed
down to the next generation by the rules of heredity. That is, the frequency of fit
and unfit trait-determining alleles in one generation's gene pool will not match
the frequency of fit and unfit trait-determining alleles in the next generation's
gene pool.

This is biological evolution. Note that mutation and selection occur at the level
of individuals or individual members of a population, but evolution occurs in the
population as a whole. A member of a population does not suddenly change into
another organism in the same generation. Instead, the entire population changes
from generation to generation.

No environment or population can be found in nature where the above
conditions are completely absent. So, every population in the universe has some
degree of Darwinian evolution going on.

Non-Darwinian evolution

Natural selection or Darwinian evolution plays a major role as the cause of
evolugion as a whole, But biological evolution can occur in other ways besides
ihe theory developed by Darwin and Wallace. Those ways are collectively called
non-Darwinian evolution. Under special conditions. evolution can often occur
by mutation alone, without the aid of selection. Again, when a significant part of
a population moves from one place to another through migration, large changes

FPorma-35, Biology Class-9-10
in the allele frequencies of that population can occur in a very short period of
time. So, migration can also result in non-Darwinian evolution. This
non-Darwinian evolution is also responsible for the emergence of new strains of
flu virus almost every year. Our genome contains many non-coding segments of
DNA that are of no known use to the body. Perhaps these too have accumulated
as aresult of non-Darwinian evolution. Darwinian and non-Darwinian evolution
usually coexist in a population. The DNA we now find in our genomes is
actually the combined result of Darwinian and non-Darwinian evolution over
millions of years.

Evidence of biological evolution

A bird's wing, a bat's wing, a whale’s flipper, a seal's foreleg, a horse's forefoot,
a human hand — all are homologous organs. Despite their apparent
morphological differences, the basic nature of their skeleton is similar. Both bats
and moths evolved flight aids as a means of survival under the same
environmental influences, albeit in different ways. Such analogous organs are
also evidence of biological evolution. Organs (such as third eyelid, tail bone,
eic.) are present in an organism's early ancestors but are absent or of no use in
organism evolved from those ancestors later on, Such extinct or atavistic organs
have been modified in those animals by natural selection. In the biosphere there
are many organisms (such as platypus, mudskipper, gnetum etc.) that have
intermediate characteristics of several organisms. Before they were found, they
were called missing links. Many missing links are no longer missing. They are
now the connecting organisms or connecting links of evolution. Fish,
amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals all have gills and tails at some point in
their embryos and look similar. It cannot be explained without evolution. A
fossil is a complete or partial petrified body or imprint of an organism buried in
the underground rock layer. For example, Darwin predicted that fossils of
animals with characteristics intermediate between reptiles and birds would be
found in a certain rock layer. About a year and a half later, a similar fossil was
found, named Archeopteryx. Not all fossils are dead. Several organisms
originated in the distant past and still survive without much change are called
living fossils, such as, Limulus, Ginkgo biloba etc. At present, it has been
possible to unravel the genome sequence or mystery of life of many organisms.
Therefore, matching the nucleotide sequences of DNA or RNA or amino acid
sequences of proteins of one organism's DNA or RNA or proteins with the
similar sequence of another organism has become easy. This can be done using
appropriate software if you have a computer connected to the internet. This
method determimes how closely or distantly an organism is zenetically related to
another organism. This shows how consistent the picture of biological evolution

2025
£23

is with other methods, including fossils. As it turns out, it proves evolution so
strongly that it has been said that if no fossils were found, it would be no

problem to determine the history of evolution using only genetic information of
life.

Application of the principles of biological evolution

Inventing new varieties

New species have naturally evolved from old species through biological
evolution, and are occurring, and may continue to occur in the future. On the
other hand, using the principles of natural selection, humans have been
inventing new breeds of animals and plants according to their needs for
thousands of years. In the early days of agriculture, without knowing anything
about natural selection, mutation, or genetics, people knew from experience that
by setting aside seeds from crops that produced good quality crops in the field
and replanting them the following year, more good crops were produced. It is
actually just an imitation of natural selection, where members of a crop
population with particular genotypes are given extra advantage to reproduce. In
this way, if the selection process is carried out for many generations, one day it
will be seen that new species of crops have emerged. Almost all of the grains we
grow today originated in this process.

Control of insects such as mosquitoes

Not only are our health and environment at risk as a side effect of using toxic
chemicals to control mosquitoes. Over time, mosquito populations are
becoming resistant to these chemicals, just as bacterial populations are
becoming antibiotic-resistant. Therefore, more and more toxic chemicals are
constantly bemg used to keep up with the biological evolution of mosquitoes.
Scientists are trying to use the principles of natural selection as a way to get rid
of this vicious cycle. They have genetically engineered male mosquitoes that
female mosquitoes will be interested in mating with but will not produce any
baby mosquitoes. If these engineered mosquitoes are released in sufficient
numbers in an area, the fitness of the mosquito population in that area will drop
to zero within a few generations. That is, mosquito breeding will stop. Without
using any toxic chemicals. In this method, since the environment will not be
changed by applying any chemicals on them. no immunity will evolve in the
mosquitoes.

Significance of biological evolution in surviving of species

During emergence of a new species through biological evolution, many species
are lost in the passage of time. For example, dinosaurs. The species which
possess a greater ability to adapt through biological evolution can go far. So
the species which can attain more ability to adapt with the environment,
flow of life and demography will survive for a longer period of time. This
process is called adaptation.

It is not that evolution occurs only in nature. Evolution can also be done by
experiment in the laboratory. This is also evidence of realistic evolution.
There is no scientific evidence found against evolution till today. The more
knowledge we gain about the biological kingdom, the more difficult it
becomes to deny evolution.

@)Exercise

(7.2) snort aner question

1, Whatis RNA?

2. What is a gene?

ri Why is a chromosome called the physical basis of heredity?
What is an autosome?
What does Thalassemia mean?

Omen

1. ea with diagrams, how DNA replicates itself.
XS | Multiple choice questions

Sy

1. Where is uracil found?
a, DNA b. RNA
c. Gene d. Locus
2. Which one does RNA contain?
i. ribose sugar
ii. morganic phosphate
iii. nitrogenous bases
Which one of the following is correct?
a. i bi & i
c. ii & iii dvi, ii, iil
Answer the aaa 3 & 4 using the figure given below-

2025
2025

3, What is the number of chromosomes in the state of X, in stem?

a. 46 b. 44
c. 23 d. 22
4, What type of chromosome are there in A and B of stem?
a. X. XY b. XK, XX
¢. ¥, XK d, ¥, XY

|) <rewsiveavsions

1, Sifat is a farmer. He has two daughters. The older daughter looks like her
father. While the younger daughter’s hair and complexion are like her father,
she looks like her mother. As the mother has given birth to a female child
recently, Sifat became aggrieved with his wife. One day he learned from the
health workers of his village that he is responsible in determining the sex of
his offspring.

a. What is heredity?

b. What does it mean by replication?

c. What are the causes of physical development differences found in the
offspring of Sifat?

d. It is irrational that Sifat got aggrieved with his wife. Explain why.

2. Schel has seen on television that an exhibition of pet cats is going on in atown
of Brazil. He saw that in spite of their belonging to the same species, they look
different in size and colour. Some days later, he watched a film about growing
up of wild cats. His father explained to him the concept of evolution and
adaptation when he became interested to know more about it.

What is locus?

What do you understand by the term adaptation?

Explain the causes of difference with the animals seen by Sohel.

What will happen if the organisms in first group of the stem are left in the

9 op

environment where the animals of the second group were found?
