Chapter Four
Work, Power and Energy

Proposed Rooppur Nuclear Power Plant

In this chapter we will see how force works. In terms of physics the word "work"
has a specific meaning. We will see that a force working on something can move
it and create kinetic energy. This kinetic energy can convert into potential energy
and this transformation of energy is a very natural process and different types of
energy can convert into one another.

One of the important aspect of science is energy and energy plays a most
important role for the development of mankind. So, how energy can be explored
from nature will also be discussed.

2025
2025

Work, Power, Energy 99

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

explain the relation between work and energy.

establish the relation among work, force and displacement.

explain kinetic and potential energy.

explain the transformation of energy source.

analyse the contribution of the source of energy regarding economics,
social and environmental influences.

explain the relation between transformation of energy and conservation
of energy.

explain transformation of energy and how its use hampers the balance of
environment.

be conscious about the effective and safe use of energy.

explain the mass-energy relation.

establish the relation between transmission of energy and power.
measure the efficiency.
100 Physics

4.1 Work

We use the term ‘work’ in various ways in our daily life. A gatekeeper
guarding a house all day long, sitting on a tool, may claim to have done a lot of
work, but in the words of physics that is not any work. In terms of physics the
word ‘work’ is well defined. If a force F is applied on any object and the object
traverses a distance s during the application of force (that is displacement
occurs) then, the amount of work W done by the force is:

W=Fs
Unit of work: J (Joule)
Dimension of work [W] = ML?T~2

Force is a vector quantity and the distance traversed or the displacement is also a
vector quantity but in case of work the product of those two vectors is a scalar
quantity.

As individual vectors there is no such condition that the direction of force and
distance travelled has to be same but in these book, we will only discuss the
force and distance travelled in the same direction.

Have you noticed, while discussing work, we said that the ‘force’ has done the
work. A person or a machine may push any object to some distance by applying
a force. In terms of daily life we say that the person or the machine has done the
work. But in physics, neither the person nor the machine does the work, always
the force applied does the work. This force may be applied by a person or a
machine.

Let us assume that, you have pushed an object to a distance s by applying a force
F and left it after setting it in motion. The object has travelled an additional
distance d and at last it has stopped. How much work is done?

The amount of work done is W=Fs, as no force was applied while traversing the
distance d, so no work is done.

2025
2025

Work, Power, Energy 101

Example

Question: Your mass is 50 kg. You have climbed up a 10 storied building, how
much work have you done? (Height of each floor is 3 m)

Answer: If your mass is 50 kg, your weight is 50 x 9.8= 490 N. This weight is a force,
that is acting downwards. If you want to climb up, you have to exert an equal
force upwards to draw yourself up.

So, upward applied force: 490 N

Distance travelled upwards: 10 x 3 m= 30m

So the amount of work done, 490 N x30 m =14700 J=14.7 kJ

Suppose, a moving object is coming towards you, you try to stop the object by
applying force F’, the object pushes you backwards by a distance s. How much
work was done by the force applied by you? Certainly you have noticed that, this
time the distance traversed is not along the direction of force, rather opposite to
it. So the amount of work done
W=F (-s)=-Fs

That is, the work done is negative. In our daily lives, we talk about work and
useless work, but what is meant by positive and negative work in terms of
physics? If the work is positive, then it can be said that the work is done by the force.
If it is negative, then it is said that the work is done ‘on’ the force or against the
force. We must have a clear conception about energy before understanding what
has just been written.

4.2 Energy

In our daily life we use the term “energy” for different purposes but in physics it
has a definite meaning. Generally speaking, there is no difference between
applying energy or applying force, but in physics, these two phrases mean
completely different things. In the previous chapter, we have learnt what is
meant by force, what is meant by energy will be discussed in this chapter.

We all have a shallow idea about energy, because we mention the words
electrical energy, thermal energy when we make casual conversation.
Sometimes we even hear about chemical energy or nuclear energy. Though light
102 Physics

is not mentioned as energy, we can assume that light is one kind energy too. The
energy which is not mentioned in our daily conversation, but will be discussed a
lot in physics is kinetic energy. We may think that there are many types of energy
in nature, but it is interesting that all kinds of energy are the same and we can
only transform them from one to another! So what is energy?

Ability to do work is energy! Not only that, when a positive work is done by
applying a force on an object, the force creates an energy in that object. The
amount of work done on the object is the amount of energy created in it, and the
person who is applying the force has to give exactly the same amount of energy.

So now you have understood the meaning of negative work. If any force does a
negative work on an object, then it is to be understood that a certain amount of
energy is taken away from the energy contained in the object. The amount of
negative work done is equal to the amount of energy taken away, and he who has
applied the force gets this energy anyway. So, on any object

Doing positive work > giving energy to the object.
Doing negative work + taking away energy from the object.

You can clearly understand that energy has no direction and it is a scalar
quantity. As we produce energy by doing work or do work spending energy,
these two have the same unit and the same dimension.

Unit of energy: J (Joule)
Dimension of energy [W] = ML2T-2

Example

Question: You have moved an object 10 m by applying a force of 100 N on it.

If the frictional force is 10 N in the opposite direction, then what is the amount

of work done by you? What is the amount of work done by the frictional force? iS
N

(Figure 4.01)
2025

Work, Power, Energy 103

Answer: You have done’ work,
W=Fs=100 N x10 m=1000 J=1 Kd.
Work done by the frictional force,
W=Fs= -10 N x10 m= -100 J

The stone has attained energy because

of the work done by you. Energy has been : q
lost due to frictional force, so heat may
also be generated. Figure 4.01: when a force is applied

on a body, frictional force acts in the
opposite direction.

4.3 Different forms of energy

We use different kinds of energy for different purposes. For example, heat
energy is needed for water to be heated, we need light energy to see anything, we
hear by using sound energy. We run machines by using electrical energy, and we
create electricity from electric cells by using chemical energy. We generate
electric energy too from the nuclear energy we get by dividing a heavy nucleus
or by addition of light nucleuses. Energy is developed in our body taking
nutrition from food, we perform our activities.

The history of our civilization itself is the history of utilization of energy by
generating energy. We see different forms of such energy around us, for example-
mechanical energy, heat energy, sound energy, light energy, magnetic energy,
electrical energy, chemical energy, nuclear energy and solar energy.

The most general form of energy is the mechanical energy, the energy that is
obtained due to position, shape and motion of the object is called mechanical
energy. There are two forms of mechanical energy; these are kinetic energy and
potential energy.

4.3.1 Kinetic Energy

We have discussed earlier that the ability to do work is energy. Everyone of us
knows that when an object is in motion, it can push another object and set it into
motion resulting in the object moving a certain distance due to the pushing.
Making another object move means, definitely a force has been applied there
and traversing a distance due to this force means work is done there!
104 Physics

Therefore we can say firmly that the energy that develops due to motion in a
body is certainly one kind of energy or kinetic energy. In the previous chapter we
said that the terrible road accidents that happen and the losses that occur are
mainly due to kinetic energy. When a bus-truck or a car moves at high speed then
it has a huge amount of kinetic energy.

We can easily calculate how much kinetic energy is produced by an object when
work is done by a force on that object.

Let an object of mass m be displaced by an amount s due to the application of
force F. Therefore work done W by the force F is:

W =Fs
According to Newton’s second law we know,
F=ma
Again, from the equations of motion we know that if an object starts its motion
from rest,
Then s = Sat? and v = at
Then work, W = Fs = mas = ma X sat? = sma?t? = mv?

Therefore we can say if a force F makes a displacement s of an object then the
kinetic energy that is generated:

1
T =>mv?
gm

The velocity v is in the square form in kinetic energy, so to double the velocity
of an object we will need to apply four times of the energy.
When learning the equations of motion, we noticed that

v? =u? + 2as

Multiplying both sides by sm the equation becomes mv? = mu + mas

If we write F instead of ma and W instead of Fs, then the equation becomes,

* my? == mu? +W

=mv? =-—mu

2 2

That is, if an object moves with velocity u, then its kinetic energy is smu"
and if W amount of work is done on it, then its kinetic energy is increased to

1 2
5mv

2025
Work, Power and Energy 105

Example

Question: A force of 10 N is applied on a stationary object of mass 10 kg for 10
s. (a) What is the kinetic energy of the object? (b) Calculate the kinetic energy
after 20 s. (c) If the force is applied for 20 s, then what is the kinetic energy?
Answer: Acceleration due to 10 N force is:

_F _10N _, 2
7m 10kg m/s

Therefore velocity after 10 second: 1
m
v=at=—,-x10s=10m/s
s

(a) Then the kinetic energy,
smv? = =x 10 x 107J = 500)

(b) Acceleration will take place for 10 s, after that no acceleration is present,
so velocity is unchanged, therefore kinetic energy after 20 s will be the same.

(c) If force is applied for 20 s, then the velocity is,
v = at =1m/s? x 20s = 20 m/s

Therefore the kinetic energy,

1 2 1 2
mv? = 5x 10 x 207 J = 2000)

Question: Motion is created in a body of mass 10 kg by applying a force, if its
kinetic energy becomes 80 J, what is its velocity?
Answer: Kinetic energy is,

1 2=80
zm = 80J

Forma-14, Physics, Class 9-10
106 Physics

_2x80J 160m?
~ m 10s?

v=4m/s

2

v

4.3.2 Potential Energy
When we were discussing work, we said that if a force does a positive work on

an object then energy is generated. When we were talking about kinetic energy
we gave the example of this too. We have shown that by applying a force on an
object if the object moves by a distance, then its kinetic energy becomes mv"

Now, we will give such an example
where force is applied and displacement
occurs even when no kinetic energy is
produced. Suppose, a spring is kept on a
table as shown in figure 4.03. You
applied a force at the free end of the
spring by your finger and compressed it
by an amount x. In such a condition, none
of your hand or spring is in motion, so no
kinetic energy is present in any of them.
Since the direction of applied force and

Figure 4.02: Stationary state of a
spring and compressed by applied
the distance traversed is in the same force

direction, so the work done is positive. According to the definition of work, here
energy is to be created. But where is that energy? Here nothing is in motion, so
definitely there is no kinetic energy.

Those of us who have used springs can guess that energy is definitely hidden in
the compressed spring. Because if an object of mass m is kept before the
compressed spring and then released, the spring would exert a force on it and
make a displacement, which means the spring would perform work. That is it’s
a kind of energy, even it is not kinetic energy, this is another form of energy. This
type of stored energy is called potential energy. This energy is developed due to
the ‘sate or position’ of the object.

2025
2025

Work, Power, Energy 107

If the constant of a spring is k, and if the spring is compressed by a
distance x from its normal state, then the potential energy stored in it is,

@) Do Yourself

If a spring is compressed or expanded by an amount x, it will
exert a force of F= -kx, using this equation it is possible to find out the
relation, V = 5 kx? Can you find it? (Since the force depends on the length
of the spring, so calculate the average force and multiply it by the total
distance.)

Example

Question: A body of mass 10 kg falls on a spring with a velocity of 10 m/s. If
the spring constant k=100,000 J/m?, what is the compression?

— 12.2
V=skx

Answer: Kinetic energy of the object,

1 1
gmv? = 5x 10 x 107} = 500 J

This energy will compress the spring, that is,

1 2 = 500
2 kx = 900)

therefore, a 2x 500 m= 1 in
~ 100,000 100

x=0.1m

When we raise anything, then it acquires potential energy. When a piece of stone
is released freely from above, its speed increases when it comes down. So it
develops a kinetic energy. This becomes possible because a kind of potential
energy was stored in it when it was in the ‘above’ position. How much potential
108 Physics

energy is stored in a stone when the stone is raised above can also be calculated.
You are realizing that the amount of work to be done when an object is raised
above is stored in that object as potential energy. If the work done is W,

W=Fh

Here, F is the applied force and / is the height. We have to apply the force F in
the upward direction and distance traversed is also in the upward direction,
therefore F is positive. The force that has to be applied for raising the object
upwards does not change as the spring force and this force is equal to the weight
of the stone. If the weight of the stone is mg,

F=mg
and W=mgh

We have to remember that the weight of the stone is a force and it acts
downwards. We have to apply an upward force equal to the weight of the stone
if we want to lift it.

Potential energy is stored in a stone of mass m by raising it a distance of h. What
amount of kinetic energy will be generated in the stone if it is released and
comes down by a distance h?

Due to the conservation of energy total of its potential energy will transform into
kinetic energy. We know kinetic energy iss mv*, SO we can write:

; mv’= mgh
v= 2gh
Honestly we can say, when we were deducing the laws of falling bodies,
we deduced this identical law once again! Now we deduced the same law using the
conception of energy quite in a different way!

Example

Question: A body of mass 10 kg is thrown in the upward direction with a
velocity of 100 m/s. What will be the height reached by the object?

2025
2025

Work, Power, Energy 109

Answer: This has been done before with the help of the laws of motin. Now it
can be done by the transformation of energy.
Kinetic energy: 1

1
= smv? = = x10x100"J =50,000)

When the object reaches a height A, at this height the kinetic energy has been
totally converted into potential energy. So,

mgh = 50,000J
, 0000 __ 50000
“ng. tox9g ™ 720

For your understanding the mass 10 kg is mentioned here. But it does not depend
on the mass. With any mass we will get this answer. For this we might have used
the formula v’?=2gh directly.

Question: A body of mass 5 kg is thrown in the upward direction with a velocity
of 50 m/s. At what height will the potential and kinetic energy be the same?

Answer: Initial kinetic energy of the body is

1 1
To =5mv* = 5X5 x 507) = 6,250 J
When kinetic energy equals potential energy, then for height 4, we can say
kinetic energy = potential energy
kinetic energy + potential energy = primary kinetic energy
kinetic energy = potential energy = primary kinetic energy/2
_ 6250]

mgh =—>—

_ 6250) 6250

—2xmg 2x5x98 = O3.78m

You may have already guessed that this problem also does not depend on the
mass.
110 Physics

4.4 Sources of energy

The history of world civilization can be simply named as the history of
utilization of energy. It can be generally said, that a simple means to understand
how developed a country is to calculate the use of electrical energy per person in
that country. Different forms of energy of the world are shown in the figure 4.03.

Source of

T ] ] i EE T T 1

Oil Gas Coal Nuclear fre.) Biomass | ae snd Geothermal |

Figure 4.03: Different sources of energy

4.4.1 Non-renewable Energy

As the history of civilization on earth is actually the history of energy utilization,
we see there is a hunger for energy in every country and every state in the world.
Everyone is searching for energy and using it in every possible manner.

Fuel Energy (Oil, gas and coal): At this moment, the biggest sources of energy
of the world are oil, gas or coal. Oil, gas or coal, are all fossil fuels, that is, being
buried under the ground from millions of years, are transformed into this form
due to prolonged period of heat and pressure. Coal, oil or gas are to be
extracted from beneath the ground. The oil that is extracted from the ground
(Crude oil) is very dense at the primary stage, which are converted into petrol,
diesel, or kerosene by refining in refineries and some other usable substances are
found as well. The gas that comes out from beneath the ground is mainly
methane CH,, water vapors and other gases can be mixed with it and these are to
be separated. The gas of our country Bangladesh is comparatively much clearer
and suitable for direct use.

2025
2025

Work, Power and Energy 111

Nuclear Energy: Many countries are utilizing nuclear energy, and one type of
fuel is also required there which is uranium. There is a similarity in the energies,
oil, gas, coal or uranium; they are spent when they are used. Men have already
estimated the amount of uranium in the world or the amount of oil, gas or coal
beneath the ground. It is seen that if people continue to use energy at the rate they
are doing now, the sources of energy like oil, gas, coal or uranium will be
exhusted hundred years at best. After that our known sources of energy will run
out. People are not that much concerned about what will happen then, because
they are almost sure that by them some other sources will be found using science
and technology. For example, nuclear fusion, using which the sun or stars produce
their energy. The fuel for fusion comes from one isotope of hydrogen and each
molecule of water contains two atoms of hydrogen. So, there is no worry for that
to run out.

4.4.2 Renewable Energy

Human being are not only relying upon new forms of energy in the future, but at
this very moment they are also dependent on the sources of energy, which will
not be finished. This energy comes from sunlight, ebb and flow of the waves of
seas, winds in open fields, hot magma from the interior of the earth or currents
of water of rivers. It is not difficult to understand that these sources of energies
are almost inexhaustible. These are called renewable energy- i.e. the energy
which can be renewed, and because of that, there is nothing to be worried about.

At present one fifth of the energy people are using world wide is this renewable
energy. As days are going by, people are getting aware of the environment. And
so the use of this type of energy is increasing more and more.

Hydroelectricity: One fifth of the total energy of the world is renewable energy.
Most of that part is hydroelectricity, to produce electricity by making a dam in a
river. Since the water of a river is inexhaustible, therefore the source of energy
of such a power plant is inexhaustible. This is the conventional concept. But if a
dam is built on a river, it harms the environment to a great extent; due to this the
people of the world have become very conscious. Those who are a little bit
farsighted don’t build such a power plant more.

Biomass: After hydroelectricity, the most renewable energy comes from
biomass, by biomass we mean wood fuel, straw etc. People in many parts of the
world have no oil, gas or electricity; they spend their daily life by burning fuel
wood and straw. The used energy by these poor people is a major part of the total
energy of the world. Even the dried tree, straw etc. are finished due to burning,
112 Physics

biomass is called the source of renewable energy because the trees can be grown
again. It is not lost for ever from the world like oil, gas or coal.

The important sources of energy are solar energy, wind energy, bio fuel and
geothermal energy besides the two forms of renewable energy, hydroelectricity
and biomass.

Solar energy: Many of you will be astonished on hearing that, only in one square
kilometer area we get one thousand megawatt energy from the sun as light and
heat which is close to the energy of a nuclear power plant. One part of the light
and heat that comes from the sun is absorbed by the atmosphere. It is absent at
night and uncontrolled due to cloud and rain. Beside this, the energy comes as
light and heat energy, it has to pass one step for conversion into electricity. It is
still said to be the most reliable source of energy. Utilizing solar heat electricity
can be generated. Now-a-days a common picture of the earth is the solar panel,
installing this on their roofs; people are generating their own electricity sitting in
their own residence.

Wind energy: After solar energy, wind energy has occupied an important place
very quickly. In our country we are not familiar seeing large turbines for wind
energy, but in many countries of Europe this is a very familiar scene. The place
at which the wind mill is set up, a large tower is erected upwards, so there is no
waste of land at all, for this reason the environmentalists like it very much. From
a wind turbine it is possible to get a few megawatts of electricity! The utility of
the energy that is generated by using air; is increasing by 30% every year. This
number is not a small number at all.

Bio fuel: The people of the world are preparing alcohol for drinking purposes
from a long time- it is one kind of fuel. Preparation of alcohol as fuels from food
like popcorn and sugarcane are almost an acceptable procedure. The oil that we
use for cooking purposes can also be used instead of diesel. There are many
kinds of trees in the world from which we can get fuel oil directly. In many
countries of the world, the research on biofuel is continuing, moreover many
countries like Brazil have started using such types of biofuel on a large scale.

Geothermal energy: Another important source of renewable energy is
geothermal energy. The inner part of our earth is very hot, when a volcano’s
eruption takes place then we become aware of it. So, if someone can make a

2025
Work, Power, Energy 113

hole a few kilometers deep, then he will get a giant source of heat energy. The
process is still not easy so its large scale use has not yet started. In some places
due to its geographical nature this type of energy is available easily and its use
has started there.

4.4.3 Transformation of energy and impact on environment

People around the world are becoming conscious about the environment. For
prosperity we need energy but the people of the modern world cannot tolerate it
if the environment is destroyed for energy. The people of the world are not ready
to use any type of energy by any means. They want to explore the energy that is
hidden in the world not by making conflicts with nature and not by destroying
the earth.

The largest example of the impact of transformation of energy on nature is the
fossil fuel or oil, gas and coal. Among these three, the amount of carbon is much
more and when these are burnt to produce heat energy then carbon dioxide gas
is produced, which is a green house gas. Therefore, this gas can confine the heat
of the world and due to this the temperature of the world is increasing slowly,
which is called global warming. Due to global warming the ice of the polar
region is melting and the height of the sea level is rising. Bangladesh is one of
the countries of the world which will be flooded and the farmlands destroyed by
salt water thus creating a harmful impact on nature. At present, all the countries
of the world are unitedly trying to decrease the amount of carbon dioxide
emission.

There is no emission of carbon dioxide in a nuclear power plant. But nuclear
wastage is highly radioactive and these have to be preserved for millions of
years for their radioactivity to reach a safe level which is not hazardous for the
environment. Though nuclear power plant is very safe due to modern
technology, sometimes owing to people's mistakes or natural calamities major
accident happens to creates a fatal disaster. Two examples of this type
areaccidents of Chernobyl of the then Soviet Union and Fukushima of Japan.
Comparatively the impact of renewable energy on the environment is less. But
when a dam is made on a river for production of hydroelectricity, then on one
hand the environment is damaged due to flooding in a large region, whereas on
the other hand, due to less flow of water draught may be created in the ao
subsequent regions.

Forma-15, Physics, Class 9-10
114 Physics

4.5 Conservation and Transformation of Energy

4.5.1 Conservation of energy

In our daily life, the energy we see around us is imperishable. It has no
destruction, it transforms only from one form to another form. When a stone is
raised, it develops a potential energy. When the stone is released, the potential
energy starts decreasing and the kinetic energy starts increasing. Just before it
touches the ground, its total energy is converted into kinetic energy. But when
the stone stops after touching the ground, then it contains no kinetic energy and
no potential energy, where has the energy gone?

(a)
(h) / r

v=0
A

(g) —v TV

V
T Kinetic energy
\V Potential energy

}
(d) »

(c
(e)
\ TV
‘ —

le
+
ce

if) V Velocity V
TV
vv
= Om
TV _j
TY

Figure 4.04: A pendulum is oscillating, the total energy is conserved between kinetic energy
and potential energy.

2025
2025

Work, Power, Energy 115

You definitely have observed that when a stone hits the ground, it hits by producing
sound and heat i.e. kinetic energy is transformed into sound or heat energy.

The example (Figure 4.04) of changing between potential and kinetic energy is
wonderful. A small stone is tied by a thread and hanged from a support. If we
pull it along one side then the stone goes up by a small amount from its
stationary position and hence a potential energy is developed in it. Now if we
release the stone, due to an unbalanced force on it, it starts going towards its
stationary state, thus creating a motion in it. When it reaches the mid position
exactly, it attains the maximum velocity. So it does not stop there rather moves
away in the opposite direction and rises up until its velocity becomes zero.
Therefore, it again develops a potential energy. When it reaches the maximum
height it stops there, owing to its potential energy again it starts moving towards
the stationary state. In this way, the stone oscillates and transformation from
potential energy to kinetic energy and kinetic energy to potential energy
continues. This process would continue for an infinite time if there was no
friction and other causes of energy loss.

Therefore,the transformation of energy is a very natural process. Transformation
of energy takes place not only between potential energy and kinetic energy. But
all the known forms of energies around us can transform from one form to another.
In our daily lives, the energy we see around us cannot be created or even can be
destroyed, it only changes from one form to another. This is the law of conservation
of energy.

4.5.2 Transformation of Energy
Around us we see many examples of transformation of energy, e.g.

(a) Electrical energy

If we want to give example of the transformation of energy, at first we give
examples of electrical energy. Because this energy can be transformed into
other energy very easily. Not only this, it is easiest to transmit electrical energy
from one place to another. Though around us there are many types of
energy, we supply electrical energy first to our residence but we don’t supply
other forms of energy. In our daily lives, we see the transformation of electrical
energy into mechanical energy in electric fans or other motors. (Though actually
magnetic energy is not different from electrical energy, even then in motor or
electrical fan we see electrical energy converts first into magnetic energy and
then converts into mechanical energy.) In the electric iron or heater it is
116 Physics

converted into heat energy. The electrical energy is converted into light energy
in light bulbs, tube light or in an LED. To produce sound energy we need to
vibrate something. It's a kind of mechanical energy. Moreover we can tell, in
speakers, electrical energy is converted into sound energy. All of us charge the
battery of our mobile using electricity, where the electrical energy is converted
into chemical energy.

(b) Chemical energy

Chemical energy is certainly an important example of transformation of energy.
The gas which is used for cooking is an example of transformation of chemical
energy into heat energy. Due to this, when electrical energy is supplied to our
residence, simultaneously gas is also supplied. Due to the conversion of
chemical energy into heat energy, we also get light energy.

The light of a candle is an example. We see the transformation of chemical
energy into mechanical energy using gas, patrol, diesel or such type of fuels in
different kinds of engines. If we observe closely, we will find that at first
chemical energy is converted into heat energy and then heat energy is converted
into mechanical energy. But in the era of modern technology, the greatest
example of conversion of chemical energy is the battery, where chemical energy
is converted into electrical energy. We cannot find any space where chemical
energy is not converted into electrical energy using battery starting from mobile
phone to car or from clock to space shuttle. The amazing example of chemical
energy is our body or body of living beings, where chemical energy from food is
converted into mechanical or electrical energy.

(c) Heat energy

If we consider from the viewpoint of quantity, the conversion of maximum
amount of energy undoubtedly takes place from the heat energy in the world.
Heat energy is transformed into mechanical energy in all engines of all
machines. In thermocouple ( applying heat at the junction of two different
metals), though there are examples of conversion of heat into electrical energy
directly, actually almost in all the cases heat energy is converted into mechanical
energy and then mechanical energy is converted into electrical energy. (To save
the environment we don't like the dissipation of energy now-a-days, so we use
energy saving bulbs more instead of using light bulbs where light is produced
due to heating.) We see the transformation of heat energy into light energy from
heated gas particles of flame of a candle where heat is generated from chemical
energy or from the filament of a bulb.

2025
2025

Work, Power, Energy 117

(d) Mechanical Energy

When electrical energy is produced bya generator, actually electrical energy
is produced by rotating a coil of wire in a magnetic field by utilizing the
mechanical energy. Heat energy is always being produced due to friction, there
mechanical energy is transforming into heat energy.

(e) Light Energy: Light is an electromagnetic wave and we can see a definite
range of the wavelengths of this wave, we call this light. Waves of wavelength
more or less than this range is present in nature and we have generated those in
different ways. For example, in a microwave oven, we convert the
electromagnetic wave into heat energy. Now-a-days using solar cell light is
transformed directly into electricity. Now-a-days the uses of photographic plate
is decreasing day by day, but all of us know that the presence of light in a photo
sensitive photographic film generates chemical energy.

Generator Cooling

tower

Figure 4.05: Structure of a nuclear power center

(f) Mass: You are definitely surprised seeing the word ‘mass’ suddenly in
different types of transformation of energy. When we mean energy, then we
never imagine the mass as energy directly. But Einstein showed using his laws
of relativity, F = mc? and with the help of this equation he informed us about the
possibility of transformation of mass into energy. In the nuclear bomb, the mass
was transformed into energy, where a huge amount of heat, light, and sound
energy destroyed the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This process of energy
transformation can be used not only in nuclear bombs but also in nuclear power
118 Physics

station. Though heat is produced here directly, using this heat energy steam is
produced and this steam is used to rotate the turbine, then this rotating turbine
generates electricity in a generator(Fig: 4.05).

We have to know an important matter though such types of transformation are
taking place around us. Although there is available energy, but this energy
cannot always be used. In the oceans of the earth, there is a huge amount of
energy, but we cannot use this energy. (Sometimes using this energy cyclones
destroy cities, habitations!) When energy is transformed from one form to
another form, then a part of it is dissipated. Actually this dissipation occurs in the
form of heat energy and this cannot be regained for further use. This dissipation
of energy actually is not the limitation of technology. It is a rule restricted by
physics.

At the very beginning of learning science many don’t know it and they try to
make an everlasting machine for transformation of energy from one form to
another form. (A motor is rotating the generator and producing electricity, again
using this electricity the motor is rotating. This is an example of perpetual
machine. It will never work).

4.6 Relation between mass and energy

You know, in the theory of relativity by Einstein it is said that the mass of
an object and the energy are identical things. If the mass m is transformed into
energy, then this energy is Z, and its amount is E = mc’, here c is the light
velocity. The velocity of light (3x10* m/s) is huge, if it is squared it becomes
huge also, it means if we can transform a little mass into energy, we will get a
huge amount of energy, in a nuclear power plant just this thing is done.

In a nuclear power plant, one of the fuels that are used is uranium 235. Here
there are 92 protons and 143 neutrons. Its amount in nature is very small, only
0.7%, its half life is 703,800,000 (704 million) years. A uranium 235 nucleus can
capture another neutron very easily (if the speed of that neutron is small).Then
the uranium 235 nucleus becomes very unstable, then it is divided into two small
nuclei Kr? and Ba''. In addition to this, three more neutrons come out
(Figure 4.06), which is depicted in the equation below. If anyone finds out the
mass that remains in the left side of the equation and compares it with the mass
that remains on the right side, will see that on the right side mass is less, the less
amount actually emerges out as energy governed by the equation, E= mc’ .

in + 735U > 22Kr + 141Ba + 3in

2025
2025

Work, Power, Energy 119

Figure 4.06: Energy production from nuclear reaction

In this reaction, the three neutrons that have come out, actually come out with
huge speed, so the other uranium (733U) nuclei cannot capture them very
easily. If by some means their kinetic energy can be lowered, then they will be
captured by other uranium (733U) nuclei and thus will break it creating some
more energy and releasing three new neutrons. In a nuclear power plant, this
work is done, so when the speed of the emerging neutrons goes down, they again
break other nucleuses and this process continues. This process is called a chain
reaction.

In this process, a huge amount of heat energy is produced, using this heat energy
water is vaporized and turbine is rotated with the help of this vapor and
electricity is produced from the generator. This type of power plant is called a
nuclear power plant. It is possible to get thousands of megawatt power from such
a power plant very easily. The wastage material that is produced after the nuclear
reaction is terribly radioactive; so many types of precautionary measures have to
be taken when processing them. If the excess neutrons that emerge after a
nuclear reaction are absorbed somewhere else by any means, then the nuclear
reaction ceases. There is a special type of rod called a control rod to absorb the
neutrons in a nuclear reactor. These are used to control the nuclear reactor.
120 Physics

4.7 Power

The term 'power' is used a lot of times in our daily lives, and it is not that the
term is always used in a positive sense! But the word ‘power’ has a definite
meaning in physics; power is the rate of doing work. That is, if work W is done
in time t, then power P is:

Ww
p=—

t
We have seen before that work is nothing but transformation of energy. As
energy can’t be destroyed, so it is only being transformed by doing work. So we
can say, if we desire, power is the rate of transformation of energy. As work or
energy is a scalar quantity, then power is also a scalar quantity.

We have known about different quantities, their units, and tried to know their

dimensions in every case while learning physics. Unit and dimension of power
are:

Unit of power: W (Watt)
Dimension of power: [P] = ML?T~?

Though we have known it here for the first time, it’s unit is very familiar to us.
If 1 Joule work is done per second then we say, work done is 1 watt or
transformation of energy takes place. If we switch on a light bulb of 100 watt
that means, in this bulb 100 J energy is being spent in each second. When we
read in the newspaper that a 1000 MW nuclear power plant will be built in our
country that means in that power plant, 1000 x 10° J electrical energy will be
produced in each second.

4.8 Efficiency

We have said earlier that a certain amount of energy is wasted every time while
transforming energy from one form to another. So we have to give a little
more energy than the amount of work we want to do. We use various types of
machines and engines in our day to day lives. It is seen always that energy is
wasted due to friction or some other causes. That is why almost always we need
to measure how efficiently a machine or engine is using energy. So, we use a

2025
Work, Power, Energy 121

new quantity called efficiency. Efficiency can be expressed in percentage as:

1 amount of work amount of work —energy wasted
Efficiency = ————— x 100 = os

energy given energy given

Example

Question: If an object of mass 10 kg is lifted 10 min 15 s using a motor of 1000

x 100

W, then what is the amount of wasted energy? What is its efficiency?

A :
nswers Amount of work: 10 x 9.8 x 10J = 9,800]

Energy given: 1000 x 15/ = 15,000/
Energy wasted: 15,000 — 9,800 = 5,200 /

9800 J
15,000 J

Efficiency = x 100% = 65.3%

You will be surprised to know that, energy is wasted in every step of production

of electricity in a power plant, and if all these wastage is taken into account,
the efficiency of the power plant can drop down to 30%.

Question: If 10% energy is wasted in every step, what is the efficiency in
4 steps?

Answer: 0.9 x0.9 x0.9 x0.9 = 0.6561
Or 65.6%

Forma-16, Physics, Class 9-10
122 Physics

Q) Investigation 4.01
(— Physical ability \

Objective: To find out the physical ability of a student

Instruments: A clock and a ruler

Procedure:

1. A building which has stairs to the first or second floor.

2. Count the number of steps of the stairs and measure the height of
each step. Multiply these two to find out the height of the first or
second floor from the ground.

3. Measure your mass on a weight measuring machine.

4. Climb the stairs as fast as you can, measure the time needed
using a clock.

5. In a similar way, measure mass of the other students in the class and
collect information about the time needed for them to climb the stairs.
Put the data in the following table.

6. Find out the physical ability of your friends and yourself.

Height of the roof: h=.........

Acceleration due to gravity: g = 9.8 m/s?

Ti
Name of the Mass i eee Power= 2% w | Average
studen (m) kg the roof (t) s ’ power

Find out the mean physical ability of all the students and see whether your

\ physical ability is more or less than that. SS)

2025
2025

Work, Power and Energy 123

(?) Exercise
General Questions

1. Why is the work done by frictional force is always negative?

2. Ifa spring is cut into two pieces will the spring constant k of the pieces
increase or decrease?

3. To keep the earth dynamic which one is necessary? Energy or power?

4. Can mass be considered as energy?

5. If velocity is increased by 1%, what will be the percentage increase of kinetic
energy?

6. Amatch stick is rubbed with its box with a force of 5 N. The stick is dragged
5 cm.
(a) What is the energy used in rubbing?
(b) What is the power needed if it takes 0.5s to drag the stick

7. The reservoir of a hydro-electric project is 800 m high from the sea level and
the power station is 250 m high. The water of a reservoir rotates a turbine
coming through the pipe. There is 20 x 108 liter water in the reservoir. If the
mass of | liter water is 1 kg, find the potential energy stored in the water of
the reservoir.

8. A boy of 40 kg can reach the roof top using the stairs in 12 s. The number of
steps of the stairs is 20 and the height of each step is 20 cm.
(a) What is the weight of the boy?
(b) What is the height reached by the boy?
(c) What is the work done to reach the roof top?
(d) What is the power he uses to reach the roof?

9. It is more advantageous to produce nuclear energy than the power station that
uses fuel because no green house gas is produced.
(a) What are the other advantages of using nuclear energy?
(b) What are the disadvantages of using nuclear energy?
124

Mathematical questions

1. Change of velocity of an object occurs
due to the application of different forces at
different times and this is shown in figure
4.07. Among OA, AB, BC and CD, when
has positive, negative or zero work been
done?

2. A girl of mass 50 kg has gone up the
stairs at a height of 5 m in 10 s. how much
work has she done? What is her power in
horse power?

Physics

valocity (m/s)
>
E

time (9)

Figure 4.07: Graph of velocity-time

3. When a force was applied on a stationary object of mass 5 kg for 10s, its
kinetic energy became 500 J. Find the amount of force applied.

4. Two objects of masses 10 kg and 5 kg
are attached to the two sides of a pulley and
is kept stationary 5 m above the ground. If
you release the two objects, then the 10 kg
mass starts to come down and the 5 kg
starts to go up. When the mass 10 kg has
come down by 1 m and the mass 5 kg has
gone up by 1 m, what are the velocities of
the two masses?

5. If a body of 5 kg is released from a
height of 100 m, at what height will the
kinetic energy be twice of the potential
energy?

Figure 4.08: Two different masses
attached to a pulley

2025
2025

Work, Power, Energy 125

\o> . ; :
Multiple choice questions
P 1

Put the tick (V ) mark on the correct answer
1. Which is the unit of work?
(a) Joule (b) Newton
(c) Kelvin (d) Watt

2. A body of mass 5 kg is kept at 20 cm, 30 m, 40 cm and 50 cm height
respectively. At which position is its potential energy a maximum?
(a) 20 cm (b) 30 cm
(c) 40 cm (d) 50 cm
Answer the question numbers 3 and 4 according to the following graph.

Y
iS
_ 10
g
_ 5
weight of car1000 Kg
0 t sec x

Figure 4.09: Velocily-time graph

3. In which part of the graph, velocity increases in proportion to time?

(a) part OA (b) part AB
(c) part CD (d) part DE

4. What is the maximum kinetic energy?
(a) 1.25 x 10°J (b) 5x 10*J
(c) 1.25 x 10*J (d) 6.2 x 10°J

5. From the law of conservation of energy it is found-
i) Energy cannot be created or destroyed. The total energy of the universe
is a constant and unchangeable.
ii) Non renewable energy will be finished quickly, so renewable energy
has to be used.
iii) We have to use energy effectively and reduce system loss in order to
126 Physics

save energy.
Which one is correct?
a)i b) ii c) ii and iii d) i. ii and iii

6. What type of energy is stored when a spring is stretched?
(a) Kinetic energy (b) Potential Energy
(c) Heat Energy (d) Chemical Energy

Creative questions

1, A boy of mass 40 kg and a young man of mass 60 kg start running from the
ground floor and reach the roof top at the same time. Both of them ran with the
same velocity of 30 m/min.

(a) What is power?

(b) What do you mean by the work 50J?

(c) Find the kinetic energy of the young man.

(d) Explain with mathematical logic whether the power of both are equal or
not.

2. Jeny resides in the 5th floor of a building. The height of each stair is 20 cm.
There are 22 stairs in each floor and Jeny needs 4 minutes time to reach the
5th floor. Susmita requires 4.5 minutes to reach that 5th floor. It is to be men
tioned that mass of Jeny and Susmita are 64 kg and 75 kg respectively.

(a) What is the main source of energy?

(b) Write two similarities between work and energy.

(c) Calculate the amount of work done by Jeny.

(d) Between Jeny and Susmita who has more power? Give reasons in favor
of your answer.

2025
