Chapter Twelve
Magnetic Effects of Current

' ie

The Children are making electromagnet in the largest practical class of the world arranged
in Kuliarchar.

All of us were charmed at one point of our life when observing the attraction or
repulsion of magnet. Though magnetism and electric current seems to be
completely different topics, these are two different forms of the same energy, that
will be discussed in this chapter. We will see that as electric current can produce
a magnetic field, similarly a varying magnetic field can also produce an electric
current.

In this chapter along with the magnetic effects of current, we will discuss how
different instruments can be made and can be used by using magnets and
electricity.

2025
2025

Magnetic Effects of Current

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

e explain the magnetic effects of electric current.

e explain electromagnetic induction.

e explain induced current and induced electric power.
e explain the main principles of motors and generators.
e explain the main principles of transformers.

e explain the functions of step-up and step-down transformers.

e understand the various uses and contributions of current in our life.

331
332 Physics

12.1: Magnet

All of you have seen a magnet. If a magnet is brought close to iron like materials,
then it attracts the iron. There is nothing visible between the magnet and iron but
an invisible force is pulling it. When observing that for the first time, one kind
of surprise is developed in all.

Those of you who have played the magnets must have noticed (Figure 12.01)
that there are two poles of a magnet. The similar poles repel, while the dissimilar
poles attract each other.

“ es

Figure 12.01: Dissimilar poles of a magnet attract, and similar poles repel.

The poles are generally named the north and south poles.

If a bar magnet is suspended freely, it always points towards the north-south
direction.

The pole which directs towards the north direction is called the north pole, and
the pole which directs towards the south is called the south pole. This occurs due
to the fact that the earth itself has a magnetic field; when a magnet is suspended;
the magnet aligns itself along that field.

We can discuss how two magnets attract one another. But first we have to know
from where the force of a magnet comes.

12.2: Magnetic Effects of Current

Those of you who have handled magnets cannot imagine that it is not different
from electricity, and a magnet can be made by electricity or flow of charges!

2025
2025

Magnetic Effects of Current 333

When a charge is kept in a place, an electric field is produced around it. Similarly,
if electric current flows through a wire, a magnetic field will be is created around
it.

Let us assume that a wire penetrates through the middle of a cardboard
and some small compasses are placed on the cardboard around the wire. The
compasses will be aligned along north-south direction. Now if a current
(moderately strong) passes through the wire, you will surprisingly notice that
suddenly the compasses are arranging themselves one after another. You will get
an impression that a circular magnetic field around the wire has been generated
due to the electric current.

Figure 12.02: Directions of the compasses around electric current

Now, if the current is stopped, then again the compasses align along the
north-south direction. If the direction of current is changed, you will find that the
compasses will arrange themselves again, but now the direction of the
compasses in the circle will be reversed. This is because the current always
produces a magnetic field around it in a definite direction.

If current flows through a conducting wire, then the direction of the magnetic
lines of force produced due to this can be obtained from the right hand rule. If
the thumb indicates the direction of current, then the other fingers will indicate
the direction of the magnetic field ( Figure 12.03).
334 Physics

Magnetic field

>)
ig

ih,

Flow of current ‘i
iB | ) |

Figure 12.03: The magnetic field around the electric
current. Magnetic field has no beginning or ending.

| Flow of current

Question: Figure 12.04
shows that current is flowing
upwards from inside the

book. Which of the magnetic
fields is correct? Co) (o)
Answer: The left figure is

correct.

12.2.1: Solenoid
If a wire is straight and Figure:12.04: Magnetic field around the

current passes through it, then current carrying wire

the nature of the magnetic lines of force was shown in Figure 12.03. How will it
be the magnetic lines of force if the wire is circular instead of being straight?
This is shown in Figure 12.05. You are able to understand that the more the
current, the stronger the magnetic field is. There is a limit to how much current
can be pass through a wire, since the wire is heated as ?R. Moreover, the
maximum amount of current that can pass through a wire depends on the source
of electricity. Therefore if we want to produce a strong magnetic field, then
instead of making a single loop, a coil is made by a insulated wire, winding it

2025
2025

Magnetic Effects of Current 335

several times. This coil is called a solenoid. A strong magnetic field can be
generated by that coil. Every loop of the coil will create a magnetic field due to
the electric current flowing through it. So the combined magnetic field is
stronger.

Current

Figure 12.05: Magnetic field produced Figure 12.06: Direction of the magnetic
due to current flowing through a loop. field (applying right hand rule) due to
the current through a loop.

If current flows through a circular coil, then the direction of its magnetic field
can also be found with the help of the right hand rule. The thumb indicates the
direction of the magnetic field, while the other fingers show the direction of the
current (Figure 12.06). A coil of wire or a solenoid behaves like a bar magnet,
and the direction of the thumb will be the north pole of this magnet.

12.2.2: Electromagnet

A more powerful magnetic field can be created if a piece of iron is inserted
inside a solenoid than the magnetic field that can be produced by using current
only. The three metals iron, cobalt and nickel have special magnetic properties.
These metallic pieces can be considered as an accumulation of individual tiny
magnets, which generally don’t act as a magnet as they are aligned in different
directions. These substances consist of an enormous number of small
magnets that are randomly oriented. Since the small magnets are randomly
oriented, the piece of iron does not act as a magnet.

But when this piece is kept inside a solenoid or a coil, and if current is passed
through the solenoid, then the magnetic field produced by that current aligns the
individual tiny magnets.
336

Figure12.07: Strong magnetic field
is produced when randomly oriented
small magnets get aligned due to
flow of current.

Physics

Therefore, the magnetic field produced by
the current and the magnetic field
produced by the iron piece itself combine
to produce a strong magnetic field (Figure
12.07). The interesting point is, as the
current is stopped, the small magnets
present within the iron piece become
randomly oriented again, and the entire
magnetic field will disappear.

A magnet prepared by this process
is called an electromagnet. Uses of
electromagnets are endless, Such as in the
sound we hear in speakers and earphones
(Figure 12.08).

Here, according to the vibration and
intensity of sound, current is sent. That
current produces an_ electromagnet
according to the vibration and intensity of
the sound. This electromagnet vibrates a
diaphragm and produce the sound.

12.2.3: Effect of Magnet on a Current Carrying Wire
We know that the opposite poles of two magnets attract each other and the

similar poles repel. We also know
that a current carrying wire
generates a magnetic field around it.
If we place a wire in a magnetic field
and current is allowed to flow
through this wire, then due to the
creation of magnetic field by the
current, it will experience a force. In
Figure 12.09, magnetic lines of
force from the north pole of a
magnet to the south pole, and a
current carrying wire placed
between the poles is shown. The
wire comes out perpendicularly
from inside the paper.

permanent

diaphragm magnent

electromagnet

\

NY]

Fig:12.08: Electromagnet is used in
speaker

2025
Magnetic Effects of Current 337

If current flows through the wire (from bottom to up) that current will create a
circular magnetic field around it and thus rearrange the magnetic lines of force,
by combining with the magnetic field that goes from the north pole to the south
pole. At the bottom of the wire the lines of forces will be more and at the top of
the wire the lines of forces will be less, which will push the wire in upward
direction.

If the direction of current through the wire is reversed, then the direction of the
circular magnetic field will also be reversed. Then the density of the lines of
force at the top of the wire will be more and hence push the wire downward.

Current
i.
. :

Figure 12.09: A current carrying wire placed in a magnetic field experiences a
force.

12.2.4 D.C Motor

You know that a magnet can be used to apply force on another magnet. In other
words, we can say a magnetic field can be used to apply force on another
magnetic field. Since a wire cannot carry very much current, it cannot produce a
strong magnetic field. That is why with the help of another magnetic field a
strong force cannot be applied on it. You have seen that ifa coil of wire is made
winding many times and a piece of iron or armature is inserted into it, then by
passing a little amount of current through the wire, the coil becomes a strong
electromagnet that can create a very strong magnetic field. If we imagine the coil
is to be a bar magnet, and keep it in another magnetic field, then we can analyze
what kind of attractive or repulsive force it feels and also the direction of motion
due to it. In Figure 12.10, an electromagnet of this type is placed in another
magnetic field, and how it changes its position due to the repulsive force is
shown. If the electromagnet is allowed to rotate about an axis, passing through
its center, then it will try to go to a position like in the next figure.

Forma-43, Physics, Class 9-10
338 Physics

If we can make such a condition that as soon as the electromagnet reaches the
next position, the current passing through the electromagnet is changed, then
just after reaching there, the bar magnet made of coil alternates its polarities,

i—, a ee
|—+— = —J = | _

N CAMs N Dy s N| 27s N eo 5

— > ee etl a a

Figure 12.10: In an electric motor current is passed through an electromagnet
in such a way that it can rotate always.

i.e. its north pole becomes the south pole and the south pole becomes north pole.
So due to repulsion, it will try to move again, i.e. it will experience a rotational
force. It will try to reach the next stable position, but just after reaching there if
the direction of the current is again changed, it will not stop there. Rather, it will
continue its rotation. That’s why, when it reaches one stable position, if current

in it flows in such a way that it

experiences a rotational force due to aa,
repulsion, then it will continue to &
rotate.

In order to change the direction of
current, we have to use a mechanical N AY S
technique with the help of a simple
device called a commutator. The two
wires of the electromagnet are placed
on two sides of the rotating axis
around which the main coil rotates in
such a way that it touches two
terminals of the main electric current
at the commutator. When the
terminals touch it, then it will flow the
current in such a way that it tries to
move away the electromagnet always
by repulsion. When it moves away from the terminals of the main current, no
current flows in the electromagnet, then it continues its rotation due to inertia of
motion.

Figure 12.11: An electric motor.

2025
2025

Magnetic Effects of Current 339

For your understanding, it is presented in a easy way (Figure 12.11). In a
practical motor, there may be many coils around the armature and each coil gets
current from the commutator and the armature continues its rotation.

12.3 Electromagnetic Induction

We see a lot of machines that rotates around us, it may seem to us that this is the
magnet and the biggest contribution of the magnetic field! Actually the biggest
contribution of magnets and magnetic fields is electromagnetic induction, that
is, the production of electricity with the help of magnetic fields.

Scientist Oersted first showed that if the magnetic field is changed through a
conducting loop, then an electromotive force is developed within the loop,
which can flow current through the loop. This property is used to build an
electric generator, where by changing the magnetic field through a conducting
loop, generates eleetricity.

If the two ends of a coil are connected
with an ammeter and a bar magnet is
inserted in it, then at the time of
inserting the magnet we will see a
sudden flow of current in the ammeter
(Figure 12.11). When we will pull it
out, again we will see a sudden flow
of current in the ammeter, but now in
the opposite direction. If we change
the pole of the magnet, then we will
see the change of direction of current
in the ammeter also! During the time
of changing the magnetic field in a _— Figure 12.12: When a magnet enters
coil of wire, the generation of voltage into a solenoid current is produced in it.
and current in the coil is called elec-

tromagnetic induction. This voltage is called induced voltage, and the current is
called induced current.

340 Physics

During this experiment, to change the magnetic field in the coil, we brought the
magnet towards the coil away from it. If we could change the magnetic field in
an other way, then we would observe the same thing.

Another way of changing the magnetic field in the coil is to bring another coil
near it (instead of bringing the magnet) and producing magnetic field in the
second coil by flowing current through it. Ifa battery and a switch are connected
with the second coil to produce magnetic field in it, then by turning the switch
‘on’, a magnetic field can be produced in the coil, again turning the switch ‘off’,
the magnetic field can be removed. Keeping the second coil near the first coil,
if a magnetic field is produced once in it and the magnetic field is removed
again, then the magnetic field will be changed in the first coil and due to this we
will see current in the ammeter! When current is produced by turning on the
switch, then the ammeter will show the presence of the current by deflecting its
needle in one direction. When the switch is turned off, the needle will deflect in
another direction, and show the current flowing in the opposite direction.

One thing we have to remember: when the magnetic field changes, only then
does the current flow. If a strong magnet is kept inside a coil, no current will
flow through the coil. Only by moving the coil, the magnetic field is changed,
then a current will flow through it.

12.3.1 Generator

When we were trying to understand how a motor works, we saw that a current
passes through an electromagnet in a magnetic field which cause it to rotate. Let
us see the matter in another way. If instead of giving connection of a battery cell
with two terminals of an electromagnet of a motor, we connect an ammeter there
and rotate the electromagnet. What will happen then?

Of course, the magnetic field within the coil will change, so a current will flow
through the coil. That is, the electromagnet of the motor that we have rotated by
passing current through it, if we rotate that electromagnet or coil, the reverse
thing happens, electricity is generated. In this way a generator is built.
Therefore, if we rotate the armature of a DC motor, we get DC electric current,
if AC motor is rotated it gives AC current.

2025
2025

Magnetic Effects of Current 341

12.3.2 Transformer

Changing a magnetic field creates
current— this property is used to
prepare transformer. In Figure b
12.13 a rectangular iron core is @)
shown to understand how a

transformer works. Conducting
wires have been winding on the

two sides of the core— of course Figure 12.13: If AC potential is applied
there are insulating covers on the in primary coil of a transformer, it

conducting wires, so that if it produces potential in the secondary coil
touches anything metallic a short

circuit doesn’t occur. In the figure, we see that on the left side of the core an AC
voltage source is connected. Since the wire is connected by winding the iron
core, so when current will flow the core will be magnetized and the magnetic
lines of force will pass through the rectangular iron core.

Since we have connected AC voltage source, the magnetic strength inside the
core will increase or decrease and will change its direction, i.e. the magnetic field
will change continuously. On the other side of the iron core, there is wire winding
also (definitely covered with insulator). The magnetic field will change
continuously in that coil through the iron core, and this change will produce an
electromotive force (emf) in the coil of the right side. If we wish, we can see it
in a voltmeter. The transfer of electricity from one coil to another coil in this
process (directly, without any electrical connection) is called transformer.

ALAA ALAA,
VU

We can do some amazing things with this transformer. If the number of turns of
both the coils is the same, then for a definite AC voltage applied in the left side
coil, we will get the same AC voltage in the right side coil. If the number of turns
on right side is ten times of that of the left side, then the voltage becomes ten
times. If the number of turns on the right side is ten times less, then the voltage
will be ten times less. The coil on the left side where AC voltage is applied is
called the primary coil and the right side coil (from where voltage is returned
back) is called the secondary coil. You may think that if it is possible to be
happened, then why don’t we arrange an enormous amount of electrical energy
by giving small numbers of turns and applying small voltage in the primary coil
and by giving much more turns in the secondary coil, and thus obtaining a much
higher voltage? We have to remember one thing: the amount of electrical energy
applied per second is measured by the formula VI (voltage x current). The
342 Physics

amount of VI that is applied in the primary coil is just equal to the amount of the
VI that we get back from the secondary coil. Therefore, if the voltage is
increased by ten times in the secondary coil, then the current in the secondary
coil will be reduced by ten times.

For your understanding, a rectangular core is shown. Practical transformers are
constructed a bit differently, the secondary coil is winded on the primary coil
and the core is also slightly different.

If the number of turns in the primary coil is , and that of the secondary coil is
n,, if AC voltage V, is applied in the primary coil, then the AC voltage V, that
will be found in the secondary coil depends on number of turns.

Vv. V; Vp _ Vs v; = (“5\y,
5X Ns, Vp ONy 80, a, =, = constant or, Vs = Tp P

If J, current flows through the primary coil, then the current J, flowing in the

secondary coilis found from conservation of electrical power.
Vp Np

hence, Vp IP = VsIs 80,15 = (2) lp = (=) Is
‘s Ss

The transformer has a greater number of turns in the secondary coil than the
primary coil and due to this, the AC voltage applied in the primary coil increases
in the secondary coil is called a step-up transformer. For transmission of
electricity, a step up transformer is used to increase the voltage by many times.
The transformer which has less turns in the secondary coil than the primary coil
and due to this, the AC voltage applied in the primary coil decreases in the
secondary coil. This is called a step down transformer.

Example

Question: The number of turns in the primary coil of a transformer is 100 and
the number of turns in the secondary coil is 1000. 10 V DC is applied in the
primary coil. What is the voltage in the secondary coil?

Answer: Zero. Transformer does not work with DC voltage.

Question: The number of turns in the primary coil of a transformer is 100 and
the number of turns in the secondary coil is 1000. 12 V AC is applied in the
primary coil. What is the voltage in the secondary coil?

2025
2025

Magnetic Effects of Current 343

Answer: V5 = (5) Vp = e) x 12V = 120V AC

np 100

Example: In the above transformer, if 1A current flows through the primary
coil, what is the maximum current that will flow through the secondary coil?

Answer: Is = (=) Ip = (=) x1A=01A

(?) Exercise
General questions

1. If you send an electron beam from one end to the
other end of your room and see that it is going
upward, what explanation will you give?

2. While making an electromagnet, an insulated N

wire is wrapped around an iron bar. Is it better to

use a single turn with a thick wire or many turns

with a thin wire? Why?

3. Between two iron bars, one is a magnet and the Figure 12.14: Change of
other is not. Without hanging or without using any position of a magnet

instrument, can you identify which one is iron and inside a loop.
which one is magnet?

4. Earth is a huge magnet. Is the north pole of the earth the north pole or the
south pole of that magnet?

5. Electricity is produced by moving the magnet, it always tends to oppose the
change. Remembering this, if the magnet shown in Figure 12.14 is raised
upward, then in which direction will current flow in the loop?
344 Physics

6. What is magnetic effect of electric current?

7. What is an electromagnet?

8. What is a generator? What are the functions of generator?

9. What is the difference between a generator and electric motor?

10. What are the functions or activities of step up and step down transformers?
11. How can the intensity of electromagnet be increased?

12. A transformer is connected with a 240 V AC source. The number of turns of
its primary and secondary coil are 1000 and 50 respectively. What is the voltage
of its secondary coil?

Mathematical questions

1. Due to the flow of I amount of current through a coil having 10 turns made of
an insulated wire, a magnetic field B is produced. What will be the magnetic
field if the number of turns is 100?

2. In the above case, to increase the number of turns by 50 more, if by
mistake 50 turns are given in the reverse direction, what will be the magnetic
field?

ry

—

Figure 12.15: Magnetic field around a current carrying wire

3. By observing the Figure 12.15, in which direction is the current flowing in
each wire?

4, The number of turns in the primary coil of a transformer is 100, here by
applying 15 V AC in the primary, 150 V AC is obtained in the secondary coil.
What is the number of turns in the secondary coil?

Q
S
N
Magnetic Effects of Current 345

EX) Multiple choice questions

Put a tick mark (1) beside the correct answer
1, What will happen to the magnetic field if electric current flows through a
solenoid made by insulated wire wound over a cylinder?

a) Will be condensed and weak

b) Will be condensed and strong

c) Will be less condensed and weak

d) Will be less condensed but strong

2. In which of the following functions is, electromagnetic induction used?
(a) Transistor
(b) Motor
(c) Amplifier
(d) Transformer

3. In which of the following process is, electromotive force produced-
i) If any magnet is kept motionless in a wire coil
ii) If any wire coil is rotated in a magnetic field
iii) If any magnet is rotated around a motionless wire coil
Which one is correct of the following?
(a)i (b) ii (c) i and ii (d) ii and iii

A bar magnet is moving to and fro through a coil of wire. As a result, voltage is
induced in the coil. The induced voltage depends on some factors. Now,
answer questions number 4 and 5.

4. In case of electromagnetic induction, the induced voltage depends on which
of the following?

(i) Intensity of the magnetic field

(ii) Resistance of the coil moving in the magnetic field

(iii) Speed of the coil moving in the magnetic field.
Which one of the following is correct?

(a)i (b) ii (c) i and ii (d) ii and iii

Forma-44, Physics, Class 9-10
346 Physics

5. What will happen to the induced electric current, if the number of turns of
the coil is increased?

a) The electric current will be reduced

b) The electric current will be increased

c) The magnitude of electric current will be zero

d) The magnitude of electric current will be negative

Creative questions

1. Answer the following question
based on the diagram: A
(a) What is the name of the
object marked A? 240 ~

(b) Explain the principle on . |

which this machine has
Oo A

aware eaeaws
We

been made.
(c) Calculate the electric np =50
current in the primary coil
of this device.
(d) Explain the function of
this device mathematically
on the basis of data.

2. A straight long wire is passed through a large piece of paper perpendicularly
and connecting a 1.5 Volt pencil battery with it, current is flown through the
wire and some iron dust is spread on the paper.
(a) What is the magnetic effect of current?
(b) How will the iron dust get arranged on the paper?
(c) What changes are to be made to the structure of the wire to increase
the intensity of the induced magnetic field? Elaborate.
(d) Analyse the phenomenon that will happen if the wire is wrapped
around an iron nail and if one end of the iron nail is taken near to the
iron dust?

2025
