Chapter Seven
Exchange of Gases

Gaseous exchange occurs im all organisms discovered till today. Gaseous
exchange is a physiological phenomenon of organism. Gaseous exchange in
plants and animals are of different types. Gaseous exchange in plants and
animals is the matter of discussion in this chapter.

2025
* explain the conception of plant's gaseous exchange;

* explain the function of main organs of respiratory system;

» describe the structure and function of lungs;

+ describe the respiration process and the gaseous exchange in human;

* explain the symptoms, causes, remedy and the preventive measures of the
diseases of respiratory system;

* determine the nature of exhaled air;

* draw the labelled diagram of lung;

* create awareness to prevent respiratory diseases.

2025
2025

7.1 Gas exchange in plants

We know that photosynthesis and respiration are the two very important
processes in the life of a plant. A plant exchanges gases mainly through these
two physiological processes. These two processes are accomplished through
many chemical reactions. Plants take CO; from ai and leave O) by
Photosynthesis. On the other hand, plants take O, from the air and leave CO, by
respiration. There is no special organ tn the plant to breathe. The exchange of
oxygen and carbon dioxide and other gases occurs through the stomata of leaves
and lenticels on the bark of the mature stem. In plants, the frequent exchange of
oxygen and carbon dioxide does not occur as it happens to an animal. In daylight
or in presence of sufficient light, the rate of photosynthesis becomes high. An
amount of oxygen gas, produced in photosynthesis, is spent in respiration.
Reversibly, an amount of carbon dioxide gas, produced in respiration, is used in
photosynthesis and so the amount of gases, exchanged, are approximately the

Same.

ee O, mm
Respiration Photosynthesis
(Plants and Animals)

Ne

Figure: 7.01 Gaseous exchange in plants

At night the light phase of photosynthesis process ceases, and so oxygen gas is
not produced. But the respiration process occurs round the clock, day and
night, and the production of CO, continues. The carbon dioxide gas is released
in the environment through stomata. These gases are also exchanged through
the lenticels developed in the bark of the mature stem. ‘This is why breathing
problem may develop ifsomeone sleeps under a big tree at night. A plant obtains

its required gases from its environment. Just as the leaf absorbs oxygen and
carbon dioxide from the air, root also absorbs required water from the soil. O,
gas is produced as a result of the reaction between CO, and water which plants
absorb from the soil by the root. Then O, gas returns in the atmosphere. In this
way exchange of gases goes on in a plant.

7.2 Human Respiratory System

To sustain life, oxygen is indispensable for a living being. Not a single animal
can survive without oxygen . Oxygen enters the body with air and is pushed into
the lungs, and is then carried to all of the organs through the blood. Within the
somatic or body cells food substance uses oxygen to break down the digested
food substances sugar (glucose) to produce heat and energy. This heat keeps the
body warm and supplies necessary energy.

Oxygen reacts with digested food substances (glucose) to produce carbon
dioxide and water. Blood carries these substances to the lungs. Here oxygen is
absorbed and carbon dioxide is expelled. The process of inhaling oxygen with
which digested food substances in the body cell are oxidized, convert the
potential energy into useable energy (kinetic energy) and eliminate carbon
dioxide, is called respiration. The exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide
occurs within the lungs and cells simultaneously. The simple equation of
respiration is given below:

C.H),0; i 60; ——_* 6co, -F 6H,0 + Energy (ATP)

Glucose + oxygen ———® carbon dioxide + water + energy (ATP)

You have learnt in class seven that inhaling of oxygen is inspiration and
breathing out of carbon dioxide is expiration, Ifthe supply of oxygen stops for 3
- 4 minutes death is inevitable. In both conscious and unconscious states
inhaling of oxygen and expelling of carbon dioxide occurs continuously, Along
with this process other processes also continue.

f025
7.2.1 Respiratory System

The organs. which take part in respiration are
called the respiratory system. The organs
related with the respiratory system are :

(1) Nasal cavity and nasal passage,
(2) pharynx, (3) larynx, (4) trachea,
(5) bronchus, (6) lung and (7) diaphragm,
(1) Nasal cavity and nasal passage : The
nose is the beginner of respiratory system. It
is a triangular hollow organ situated above "ig: 7.02 Human respiratory system
the buceal cavity. It helps fo sense the smell of a substance. A specific type of
nerve in the nose stimulates the organ, to give us the sense of smell. Its structure
is such that it makes the inhaled air suitable to be received by the lungs.

The nasal passage extends from an aperture in front of the nose and up to
the pharynx behind. A thin partition divides
it. Its front side is covered with cilia and the
rear part is lined by mucous producing
membrane.

The cilia together with mucous serve to trap
foreign substances, such as germs and dust.
Before entering the lungs this makes the air
relatively free from dirt. The inhaled air when
passed through the nasal passage becomes
warm and moist so that sudden cold air does
not harm the lungs. Vigure: 7.03 Nasal passage and pharynx

(2) Pharynx - If we open our mouth, the pharynx can be seen at the back of the
mouth. Tt extends behind the nasal passage to the upper part of larynx. At the back
of the roof of the mouth, there is a small tongue like part called the soft palate.
When swallowing food or drink, the soft palate closes the backside of the nasal
cavity. As a result food cannot come out through the nostrils. Another important
function of the soft palate is to produce mucous. There might be a link between
the development of the soft palate and evolution of the human oral system.

Forma-21, Biology Class-9-10
(3) Larynx - It is situated below the pharynx and at the top of the trachea. There
are two folds of muscle situated on opposite sides of the larynx. These are the vocal
cords. A flap of soft tissue at the back of tongue is the epiglottis. It acts as a lid at
the time of taking food. This lid covers the opening of the larynx (so food particles
can not enter the oesophagus) while keeping the larynx open during respiration,
So, air can get into lungs through this passage. But it has no function in respiration.

(4) Trachea- This is a hollow tube which lies in front of the oesophagus and
extends from the larynx downwards into the thoracic cavity, It is supported by
incomplete rings of cartilage and smooth muscles. The inner layer of the trachea
is covered with mucous membrane and cilia, Air flows through the trachea, But
through the constant rhythmic beating of the cilia the trapped dust, germs and
other unwanted particles are expelled.

(5) Bronchus- The lower end of the trachea is divided into two bronchi which
lead to the right and left lung lobes respectively. These are bronchi. Each of the
bronchi divides and sub divides repeatedly to form bronchioles. The structures
of the bronchi are just like the trachea.

(6) Lungs- The lungs are the main organ of the respiratory system. The right and
left lungs are situated on either side of the heart within the thoracic cavity. They are

Deoxygenated blood
_ enters the lungs from heart

Oxygenated blood

—Pulmonary artery
enters the heart y

Pulmonary vein

Bronchus
Bronchigle

Alveoli

Blood capillaries — *

Figure: 7.04 Air sacs inside the lungs

2025
£23

ek
165

spongy, soft and light reddish in colour. The right lung ts three lobed and the left
one is two lobed. The entire surface of the lung is covered in a double layered
membrane which is named the pleura. The space between the two layers
contains a fluid. This saves lungs from friction, as the lungs rub against the
thorax during breathing movement. The lungs contain numerous air sacs called
alveoli, small bronchioles and blood vessels.

The smaller bronchioles (alveolar ducts) terminates in crusts alveoli. So, air can
enter from the nasal passage to the alveoli directly, Each alveolus (singular of
alveoli} wall is composed of a single layer of epithelial tissue. The alveoli are
surrounded by mesh work of capillaries.

When air enters the alveolus, it expands like a baloon and later contracts
automatically. The wall of the alveoli and blood capillaries are so thin that
gaseous exchange occurs between them.

Activity : Draw a diagram of the respiratory system and label its different parts. |

(7) Diaphragm- The diaphragm is a muscular sheet which separates the
thoracic cavity from the abdominal cavity. It looks like a spread umbrella. When
the diaphragm contracts, it moves downwards, and the volume of the thoracic
cavity increases. When the diaphragm expands it moves upward, the throacic
cavity contracts and returns to its normal position. The diaphragm plays an
important role in respiration.

7.2.2 Breathing

All the organs related to breathing remain open only through the pharynx. The
other ends of the organs remain closed, The air enters air sacs of the lungs easily
through the nasal passage. Nerve impulses help in managing breathing. The inter
costal muscles (muscles within the ribs) and diaphragm contract, and the
diaphragm goes downwards and the thoracic cavity expands. The volume of the
thoracic cavity increases and the air pressure decreases, So, the pressure within
the thoracic cavity becomes less than the outer atmospheric pressure. This forces
the lungs to expand and draw in air through the nose and trachea. This is
inhaling. After the contraction the muscles relax. Then the diaphragm expands
and the muscles relax, allowing the diaphragm and thorax to return to normal
position. So, the air pressure increases, the lung shrinks back, forcing the
moistened and carbon dioxide- enriched air out again. This is exhaling. In this
way, breathing goes on constantly. This is external respiration.

Exhaling

Figure: 7.05 Tnhaling and exhaling

Gaseous exchange: Gaseous exchange means the exchange of oxygen and
carbon dioxide. It occurs in between the air and blood vessels of the lungs.
Gaseous exchange occurs in two steps, the absorption of oxygen and the giving
out or expelling of carbon dioxide.

Absorption of Oxygen: Gaseous exchange in the lungs takes place through
diffusion. In the blood oxygen does not remain free. A laree amount of oxygen
combines with the haemoglobin of the red blood corpuscles and forms
oxyhaemoglobin. This is a temporary compound. Production of these
compounds depends on the concentration of oxygen im the plasma, During
blood transport, a large amount of oxygen diffuses from the plasma to the

lymph,

2025
2025

This happens when the oxygen concentration in the lymph is less. So, the
oxygen concentration in the plasma becomes less. Then haemoglobin begins to
give up oxygen, which was bound with it. In this way at first oxygen enters the
plasma and then into the lymph or intracellular uid. Steps which occur during
oxygen transportation are described below.

The exchange of gases between alveoli and blood and tissue occurs by diffusion.

Diffusion of gases takes place due to a gas pressure difference between alveoli
and blood. After entering into the blood from the lungs dissolved oxygen flows
in two ways. A small amount of oxygen flows in the plasma and most of the
oxygen makes a loose bond with the iron part of haemoglobin and forms a
temporary compound called oxyhaemoglobin. From oxyhaemoglobin oxygen
separates easily.

Haemoglobint+ oxygen—oxyhaemoglobin (unstable compound)
Oxyhaemoglobin— free oxygen + haemoglobin

After entering the blood capillaries, oxygen separates and penetrates into lymph
by diffusion first from the red blood corpusele and then blood capillaries. Lastly,

from the lymph, oxygen reaches the cell after penetrating the cell
membrane.

Carbon dioxide transport: Carbon dioxide is produced by the oxidation of
food. This carbon dioxide at first diffuses through the cell membrane into the
lymph. Then, from the lymph CO, enters the blood plasma through capillary
diffusion. Carbon dioxide is mainly transported as bicarbonate (by blood plasma
as NaHCO, and by red blood corpuscles as KHCO3) to the lungs. In the lungs
the carbon dioxide is released from bicarbonate and passed to the alveoli. Then
carbon dioxide is forced out, diffusing through blood capillaries and alveoli.

Activity : Experiment to show the nature of exhaled air.

Apparatus : Two large test tubes, one 10 ml syringe without needle,
two plastic tubes (one of which should be fitted airtight in the syringe)
and lime water.

Procedure: Prepare two test tubes each
containing the same amount of lime
water. Then insert one end of both the
plastic tubes in the test tubes in such a

way that the end remains submerged
inside the lime water. Now one end of
the plastic tube needs to be fitted
airtight at the opening of the syringe. Inhaling
But before that, the plunger must be :
drawn out upto 10ml. When the tube is Figure: 7.06 Experiment to show
attached to the syringe, the plunger the nature of exhaled air
should be pushed inside which will cause bubbles in the lime water kept
inside. Repeat the same process to insert air inside. Now put the end of the
plastic tube attached with the other test tube in your mouth and gently breathe
inside it. Keep your mouth aside when you inhale. Observe lime water in both
test tubes for 15 seconds. Continue the experiment for 15 seconds more if no
change is observed.
Observation: You may observe that there was no change in the lime water
where normal air was inserted through the syringe. But the lime water of the
test tube where exhaled air was inserted has turned milky.
Conclusion: The presence of CO? in the exhaled air has turned the lime
water milky. This is because the amount of CO) is more in exhaled air
than in normal air, So, the lime water was not changed when normal air was
inserted.

Clear lime Water
*

( Activity : Fill in the table :

On
s — = — —s — —
Nostril ‘ , : : Alveohus 4 Blood
CO;

2025
2025

7.3 Diseases of Respiratory System

The lungs are an important organ of respiratory system. This organ can be
damaged by the infection of bacteria and viruses. The lungs may be affected due
to air pollution, because of the presence of dust particles, and chemicals.
Carelessness may cause complex diseases and infections. Cormplexities and
death from common diseases can be decreased by learning about causes,
symptoms, remedies, and prevention of common diseases of the respiratory
system.

1. Asthma: Asthma usually occurs due to overactive immunity system. The
immunity system works more severely than necessary when a foreign body
enters into lungs. In many cases asthma patients have a family history of the
disease. It is not a contagious or microbe borne disease.

Causes: Certain allergic foods (prawn, beef, hilsha-fish etc.), smoke, dust, pollen
ete. entering the ling with the inhaled air, can be the cause of asthma. In infants,
common cold may cause symptoms of asthma. A seasonal vaniation is noted.
Symptoms of asthma increase in certain seasons round the year.

Symptoms: The symptoms of the disease are as follows-

- Sudden increase in respiratory distress.

- Suffocation, lip becomes blue. the veins of the neck swell.

- Rapid deep breathing is attempted and whizzing and whistling sound in the
chest.

- As sufficient oxygen is not available in the alveolus, that results in the
sutfering of the patient.

- Sometimes white sputum may be discharged while coughing.

- Usually there is no fever.

- During respiration, the skin between two ribs is drawn inward.

- Patient becomes weak.

Remedies: By medical treatment the disease cannot be fully cured. But by proper
medication prorapt relief may be ensured.
-  Awoid those food which creates respiratory distress.
Live in clean well -ventilated room.

Avoid using or coming into contact with items like animal fur, artificial fiber
etc. that aggravate the symptoms.

Be careful and follow physician's advice.

Avoid smoking, tobacco, jarda, gul.

Serve the patient liquid diet during breathing problem.

Prevention

Live in hygienic atmosphere.

Avoid air pollution and things that may cause asthma in the workplace or house.
Always carry inhalers and medicine and take them when necessary, It is to
be noted that quacks treat: patients of this disease with high dose steroids,
which gives instant relief from pain but causes long lasting negative health
consequences. This type of treatment as well as quacks should be avoided.

2. Bronchitis: Acute and chronic inflammation of the inner lining of any part of
the bronchi and bronchial tube is called bronchitis. The disease is caused by
bacterial infection. Once attacked by bronchitis there is a possibility of recurring
attack. Usually, infants and elderly persons are attacked by this disease.

Causes: Smoking, unhealthy environment and pollution such as- industrial dust,
smoke etc. are the main causes of this disease. Living in inhaling dust, polluted
air, smoking cigarettes and cold are some of the causes of bronchitis.

Symptoms

Cough, chest pain and breathing distress.

When coughing the patient feels severe chest pain.

Fever and gradual! weakness,

Can not eat solid food.

Sputum is discharged with cough, If phlegm or sputum comes out with
cough for continuous three months and if this disease attacks consecutively
for two years, it is considered to be chronic bronchitis.

Remedies: Preventive measures include-

Stop smoking, drinking alcohol, use of tobacco,

f025
- Follow the physician's advice.

- Keep the patient in tolerable temperature and dry environment,
- Feed nutritious liquid and hot food, e.g. hot milk, soup ete.
- Taking full rest,

Prevention:
- Bad habits like smoking, drinking alcohol, taking tobacco should be stopped.
Abstain from working in environment with dust or smoke.

- Children or elderly people must not get cold,
3. Pneumonia: Pneumonia is a lung disease, Excessive cold may cause this

disease. Getting affected by cold after measles and bronchitis may lead to
Pneumonia, It is a dangerous disease for children and elderly people.

Causes: Pneumonia is caused by Pueumococcus bacteria. Pneumonia may also
be caused by other bacteria, viruses or fungi. This disease may even occur when
enzymes or saliva get into the trachea.

Symptoms; These include-

- Deposition of mucous like liquid substances which produce cough.
- Coughing and breathing distress.

- High fever and chest pain.

- severe respiratory distress; at the last stage whizzing sound in the chest.
Remedies: These include-

- Seeking timely advice from a physician and to follow the treatment given.

- Serving hot and liquid nutritious diet.

- Drinking plenty of water.

Prevention: Preventive measures are-

- To be careful that the children and elders are not attacked with cold.

- Live in well ventilated house.

- Keep the patient in tolerable temperature and dry environment.

- Avoid smoking.

Forma-22, Biology Class-9-10
4. Tuberculosis: Tuberculosis is a well-known air borne infectious disease. In
some cases, people coming into contact with patients having skin affected by
germs of tuberculosis or by taking infected cow’s milk are more likely to
develop the disease. It is to be noted that any man at any time may be affected by
tuberculosis. Those who work hard are weak, live in damp and unhealthy
environment, suffer for malnutrition, or remain exposed to patients of tuberculosis
easily become the victim of tuberculosis, Most of us think tuberculosis is only a
lung disease. This idea is not correct at all, Tuberculosis occurs at any organ of
the body, such as, intestine, bone, etc.

Not every person infected with tuberculosis becomes very sick and the
symptoms are not exposed easily, When the germs destroy white blood
corpuscles, the body become weak, then the symptoms are exposed.

Causes: The disease is caused by Mycobacteriwn tuberculosis, a type of
bacterium. However, some other bacteria that belong to the mycobacterium
genus may also cause tuberculosis. If anybody live in an unhealthy environment
then germ easily spread in body.

Diagnosis: This disease can be found out by sputum test, skin test (MT test),

cyto- and histopathology test and chest X-ray. The test depends on the parts of

the body affected by tuberculosis. Presently the research is going on how to

detect the disease confirmly by blood test. Now a days DNA based test is very

much available in our country for the detection of tuberculosis germ in the

sputum and other sample of patients.

Symptoms and signs

- Weight loss, general weakness,

- Usually cough and cold continues more than three weeks.

- Couching, sometimes with blood.

- Evening sweat and rise of low fever. Temperature of the body does not
increase so much.

- Chest pain, indigestion, abdominal diseases.

Remedies: It includes-

- Continue treatment according to the advice of physician.

- Treatment of the disease is a lengthy process, treatment should continue

untill the complete cure.
- Physician's instructions must be followed strictly.

2025
£23

- Patients with tuberculosis should be isolated or sent to hospitals for
complete cure.
- Keep the used belongings of the patient separately.

- Patient's cough and sputum should be buried in the soil.

- Proper treatment and adequate nutritious diet should be arranged.

- Without consulting the physician, medicine should not be stopped.
Prevention: To get rid of this disease, all children should be vaccinated by
B.C.G, The baby should be vaccinated within one year after birth. Though
BCG vaccination gives children protection against deadly tuberculosis, it
doesn't remain effective for grownups. So administering vaccination in
childhood is not a lifelong protection. There are facilities of vaccination in
different health centers of the country,

5. Lung Cancer: Among the various types of cancer, lung cancer is extensive
and terribly prevalent. In our country it is the leading cause of death of male
cancer patients. Tuberculosis or any other pneumonia causes one type of
wound that afterwards turns into cancer.

Causes: Smoking is considered to be one of the main causes of lung cancer.
Lung cancer may be caused by air and environmental pollution, coming in
contact with pollutants like asbestos, arsenic, chromium, nickel, solid metal
powder etc. at workplace or home. It is assumed that shortage of roughage in
diet increases the possibility of the disease.

Symptoms and signs: The sooner primary symptoms of lung cancer are
diagnosed and given treatment, the more is the chance of living longer. At the
primary stage symptoms of lung cancer are found-

- long lasting dry irritating cough.

- chest pain, hoarseness of voice.

- gradual or day by day loss of weight, loss of appetite.

- asthma, frequent fever.

- repeatedly infected by pneumonia and bronchitis,

- feel pain in bones, weakness, paralysis of any gland, jaundice.
Diagnosis

At the primary stage lung cancer can be determined by-

Examining cough and sputum.
X-ray of chest.

CT scan

MRI

For final confirmation, cytopathology or histopathology tests are done,

Remedies:

When the symptoms are found, consult the physician without any delay.
After the disease is diagnosed, treatment should be taken as per the advice
of the physician,

Depending upon the necessity, use or apply radiotherapy. Radiotherapy
destroy the cancer cell by radiation.

Prevention: According to the view, preventive measures incluce-

i

Abstaining from smoking and drinking aleohol.
Not taking excess fatty food.
Regular exercise.

Making the habit of taking adequate amount of vegetables.

@)Exercise

What is cellular respiration?

What is the function of Pleura?

What is Bronchitis?

What is the function of the Diaphragm?

What are the causes of Pneumonia?

2025
Which is the cause of tuberculosis?

a) Virus b) Bacteria

c) Fungi d) Protozoa
Gaseous exchange in plants occur through—
i) stomata

ii) lenticels

iii) root hair

Which one is correct?

a) i & ii b) i & iii

c) ii & it d) i. ii & iii

Read the stem and answer the questions 3 and 4.

Rita went to the doctor with a complaint of weakness. The doctor told her
that she had a deficiency of a particular blood cell. To meet this insufficiency
he advised her to take more nutritious food and vegetables.

. Which one is deficient in Rita’s blood?
a) Red blood corpuscles b) White blood corpuscles
e) Platelet d) Plasma,

4. The particular cell-

2025

i) is a compound of iron

ii) reacts with oxygen
tii) contains carbon dioxide
Which one is correct?
a)i & ii b)i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i. ii & iii
a)
b)

d)

ba

a)
b)

c)

Figure-P Figure-Q

Which cell carries oxygen in the blood?

What does it mean by trachea?

Explain the process meant by P of above figure.

P and Q shown in the picture are dependent on one another in connection
with gaseous exchange. Analyse with your reason.

Rashed and Jamil work at a ship breaking industry, Both of them called a
doctor for chest pain, cough and other complains, After different types of
tests, the doctor diagnosed that Rashed's respiratory organ had irregular cell
division. On the other hand, Jamil's disease has spread in intestine and bones
along with respiratory organs.

What is the diaphragm?

What is meant by external respiration?

Explain, how does the disease spread in Rashed’s body?

Which one of the two diseases of Rashed and Jamil is comparatively easier
to be cured? Analyse.

2025
