2025

Chapter Four
Internal and External Structure of the Earth

In the very beginning of earth's history, this planet was a giant.red hot, gaseous
ball. Gradually this gaseous sphere began to cool and solidified forming a thin crust
on its surface. The earth consists of three main layers—the core, the mantle and the
crust. The core is the inner part of the earth, the crust is the outer part and between
them is the mantle. The crust of the earth is composed of a great variety of rocks.
Enduring processes of the landforms of the earth are influenced by form of rocks
and minerals.The surface of the earth is always changeable. This changing nature
has two faces. One occurs suddenly and the other is a slow process. In this chapter
we shall discuss internal and external structure of the earth, types of rocks, slow
and abrupt change of the earth surface and different types of landforms.

Mountain Range

The external structure of the earth
At the end of this chapter. we will be able to—
* describe the internal structure of the earth;
* describe the external structure of the earth;
* describe the landform change of the earth surface;
* explain the reason of the abrupt change of the earth surface;
* analyze the result and reason of earthquake, tsunami and volcano;

* explain the result and reason of slow change of the earth surface.
” Geography and Environment

* explain the rivers path way;
® discuss the landforms created by rivers;

e describe the characteristics of the main landforms of the earth;
* analyze the impact of tsunami occurred in the past on the basis of data.

Internal structure of the earth

In the very beginning earth was a hot, gaseous ball. From that condition it became
cool and solidified. During that period the heavy metals concentrated at the centre
and comparatively lighter materials sequentially concentrated around that heavy core
according to its density and weight. These different layers called Spheres. The
upper most sphere is called Lithosphere. The upper part of lithosphere is known as

Earth Crust.

The earth's crust : The hard stratum of the rock covering the outer shell of the whole
earth is known as the earth's crust (fig. 4.1). The thickness of the earth's crust is
the lowest in comparison to the other interior layers of the earth. On an average, it is
about 20 kilometres. The thickness below the earth's crust on an average is about 35
lilometres known as SIAL which is composed of Silicon (81) and of Aluminium
(AL). On the other hand, the earth's crust beneath the ocean is composed of basalt
which is heavier than that of Sial layer and its major elements are Silicon (Si) and
Magnesium (Mg) and is generally known as SIMA. The external structures such as
Mountains. Plateau, and Plains are visible. The temperature beneath the earth's
crust is increased by 30° Celsius for cach kilometre towards its centre.

UTHESPHERE —<—
100 Km. 3 ——————— oa

Fig. 4.1; Cross section of the Earth's structure
Source : Trabuck and Lutgens (1994)

2025
2025

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 47

Barysphere : The stratum beneath the earth's crust which is about 2,885 kilometres
thick is called the Barysphere. Barysphere mainly consists of Basalt rock. This
sphere has silica, magnesium, iron, carbon, and other minerals. Barysphere is divided
into two parts. (a) Upper Barysphere which is extended up to 700 kilometres, This
sttatum mainly composed with silicate minerals enriched with iron and magnesium.
(b) Lower Barysphere mainly consists of minerals of iron oxide, magnesium oxide
and silicon dioxide,

Centrosphere : Centrosphere is situated just after the Barysphere. It is extended
from the lower parts of the Barysphere up to the centre of the earth, The thickness of
this layer is about 3,486 kilometres. It is known from the seismic waves that the
Centrosphere has a liquid cover which is about 2,270 kilometres thick and also has
a hard inner-part which is about 1,216 kilometres thick. The scientists believe that iron,
nickel, mercury and lead exist among the elements of Centrosphere. But the two major
elements of Centrosphere are iron (Fe) and Nickel (Ni).

Rocks and minerals

Earth's crust is formed with rocks. Rocks are composed of different types of
minerals. Mineral is the corapound form of some basic elemenis mixed by natural
process. Minerals are natural inorganic elements which have distinct chemical
composition, physical and chemical characteristics. Though generally minerals are
formed by two or more elements but some minerals can be formed with only one
basic element. Such as, diamond, gold, copper, silver, mercury and sulphur.

Rock forming minerals have different characteristics and most of the rocks are
composed with two or more minerals. In that sense minerals and rocks are the
same things. For example, limestone which is a sedimentary rock also known as
calcite is a mineral.

Difference between rocks and minerals : Minerals are homogenous inorganic matter
and the rocks are heterogeneous materials. Minerals are solids and crystallized, though
some rocks are solid but are not crystallized. Minerals have specific chemical
composition but rocks have no such thing. The characteristics of minerals are
determined by the nature of their constructing elements. Whereas, the nature of rocks
are regulated by the nature of the minerals that compose them.
48 Geography and Environment

Task : Narrate the difference between Rocks and Minerals in the following columns.
Rocks Minerals
Classification of rocks

The materials of the earth crust or lithosphere are generally called Rock. Every
solid and fluid material which formed the earth surface is rock. Such as pebbles,
sandstone, granite, clay, chalks etc. According to formation of rocks can be classified
into three major parts : (1) Igneous rocks, (2) Sedimentary rocks, (3) Metamorphic
rocks.

(J) Igneous rocks : At the beginning the Earth was a hot gaseous spheroid, This
gaseous spheroid was transformed into liquid by radiating heat. After radiating
more heat its upper part became cool and solidified. Racks which became solidified
from liquefied state are called Igneous Rocks. As the igneous rocks form at the very
beginning of earth's origin it is also called the Primary Rocks. There are no layers in
this rock type. So, it is also called Unstratified Rock. There is no fossil in this rock
type. The characteristics of igneous rocks are : (a) granular or crystalline rocks, (b)
do not have strata, (c) hard and less fragile, (d) do not contain fossils, (e)
comparatively heavy.

Often volcanism and earthquake create fracture at the weak part of the earth surface.
Then the hot molten lava comes out from the interior of the earth and forms igneous
rocks. In ths way Basalt and Gramite are created. Igneous rocks can be divided
into two parts : (a) Extrusive igneous rocks, (b) Intrusive igneous rocks.

(a) Extrusive igneous rocks : The hot liquid material in the interior of the earth
which is called Magma finds its way to the surface of the earth through the crack of
the earth’s outer skin. It is called Lava. The lava after cooling becomes extrusive
lyneous rocks. The granules of the igneous rocks are refined and have deep colour.
The examples of extrusive igneous rocks are Basalt, Rhyolite, Andesite etc.

2025
Internal and External Structure of the Earth 49

(b) Intrusive igneous rocks: When the rising magmas during a volcanic activity do
not reach the earth's surface

tather they are cooled and Volcanic

solidified below the Cont —

surface of the earth, the &
resultant igneous tocks are

called Intrusive Igneous

Rocks. The granules of

these rocks are coarse and

have light colour. Granite,
gabbro, dolerite, laccolith,  pyyton
batholith, dike and sill are

the examples of intrusive Batholith
igneous rocks (fig. 4.2). Fig. 4.2; Igneous rocks

(2) Sedimentary rocks : Sedimentary rocks are formed due to aggregation and
composition of sediments, Due to influence of rain, wind, glacier, heat, wave etc.
igneous rocks are eroded and disintegrated and transformed into gravel, mud, sand

and dust, These eroded rock debris are transported by stream, wind and glacier and

deposited in lowlands, lakes, ponds, basins, rivers and seas. 50, sediments and debris

are regularly deposited by layers. Continuous sedimentation increases the weight
and pressure and different
layers are consolidated and

compacted to form sedimentary
f rock. Sedimentary rocks cover
5 percent area of total earth’s crust.
However, 75 percent of the
continental land mass is
sedimentary rock. This is called
Sedimentary Rocks as this form
from sediments or debris (fig.4.3).

Fig, 4.3 : Sedimentary rocks

Sedimentary rocks are also
called as Stratified or Layered Rocks because these rocks have different layers
or strata of different types of sediments. Sedimentary rock can be formed by

Forma-7, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
50 Geography and Environment

mechanical, organic or chemical processes. Sandstone, coal, shale, limestone, claystone,
kaolin are the examples of sedimentary rocks. As coal and mineral oil originated trom
organic body these are also called Organic Rocks. In many sedimentary rocks different
types of fossils of plants and animals are found.

Characteristics of sedimentary rocks: Sedimentary rocks are stratified, sofi and
light, easy to erode. Fossils can be seen in sedimentary rocks. This rock is porous.

(3) Metamorphic rocks : Metamorphic rocks form deep in the earth where
high temperature, greal pressure, and chemical reactions cause one type of rock to
change into another type of rock. The rocks are partially melted and the chemicals
within them are rearranged so that the final rock is very different from the original
rock, One very common metamorphic rock is marble, Marble is fonmed when
heat and pressure are applied to limestone for many thousands of years. Some
other examples of metamorphic rocks are gneiss, slale, schist, and quarizite,

Characteristics of metamorphic rocks :

(a) Classified by texture and composition.

(b) Rarely have fossils.

(c) May have alternate bands of light and dark minerals.

(d) May be composed of only one mineral, example marble and quarizile.
(e) May have layers of visible crystals.

(f) Usually made of mineral crystals of different sizes.

(g) Rarely have pores or openings.

(h) May have bent or curved foliation,

Task : Fill in the blanks of the classification of rocks in a group in a table below.

Classification of Types Characteristic Examples
rocks on the basis
of structure

Ieneous Rocks

Sedimentary Rocks

Metamorpluic Rocks

2025
2025

Internal and External Structure of the Earth $1

Changing process of the carth surface

The earth's crust is always changing. Different landforming process bring about this
change. Landforming processes are the activities through which the changes are
caused naturally in the formation of the land. For example, a river is building a flood
plain through deposition. Therefore, the depositional activities of a river is a
landforming process. The landforming processes are done with the help of different
natural forces such as the gravitational forces, interior temperature, and the solar
bring changes on the earth's crust either slowly or rapidly. Generally, energy. The
different landforming processes with the help of the aforesaid agents external force
like solar energy brings about a slow change inthe formation of land, The changes
brought about on earth's surface through longer period of time, is known as slow
changes. The slow changes are caused in two processes, i.e; denudation and deposition.

Landforming process

t y

Slow/Gradual change Slow and sudden change Sudden/Rapid change

‘

x Diastrophism x
r i ¥ ¥
Denudation Deposition Earthquake Volcanism
|
¥ ¥ |
Weathering Erosion Transportation

Gradual change : This is the opposite of rapid change where changes occur due to
natural forces like solar energy, wind, rain, stream, glacier etc.Generally slow process
occur overa huge area,

Rapid change : The inner part of the earth is still hot and molten. When there is a
difference in temperature and pressure within this portion there causes
earthquakes. Due to the earthquakes most of the changes occur. Rapid change of

the earth surface mainly occurs due to Earthquakes, Volcanoes. and Tsunami.
52 Geography and Environment

Earthquake

An earthquake isa shaking of the ground caused by the sudden breaking and shifting
of rocks beneath the earth surface. The shaking could last seconds or minutes, and
there may be several earthquakes over a period of time.

Causes of earthquakes

The scientist have determined various reasons of earthquake by examining different
types of geological events. The causes of earthquakes may be divided into three
main groups (i) surface causes, (ii) voleanic causes and (iii) tectonic causes.

(i) Surface causes : Greal explosions, landslides, slips on steep coasts, dashing of sea
waves, avalanches, railway trains, heavy trucks, some large engineering projects
cause minor tremors. Some of them are man-made, others are natural.

(ii) Volcanic causes : Volcanic eruptions produce earthquakes, Earthquakes may
precede, accompany and frequently follow volcanic eruptions. They are caused by
sudden violent displacements of lava within or beneath the conduit of the volcano.

(iii) Tectonic causes : Structural disturbances resulting in the relative displacements
of the parts of the lithosphere is the main cause of this type of earthquake. Most of
the disastrous earthquakes belong to this category and occur in areas of great faults
and fractures. Sudden yielding to strain produced on the rocks of accumulating
stress causes displacements especially along old fault zones known as ereat
transform faults.

Earthquakes often occur on the ocean floor. This produces large sea waves known as
tsunami that produces devastating effects on the sea coasts. Recently, the tsunami
produced by the earihquake near the Sumatra coast affected distant places like
Sri Lanka and South India and even African coast.

Effects of earthquakes

Earthquake is accepted as a natural calamity. Most of the times, it causes great loss
of lives and wealth. Generally, it may be mentioned that the devastative nature of
earthquakes brings the following damages and changes in the earth’s crust.

(1) Faults, cracks or landslides occur in the earth’s crust due to the earthquakes. The
course of the rivers is also changed. For exaruple, the bed of the Brahmaputra River
was raised and the river changed its orginal course and started flowing through the
channel of the Jamuna due to earthquake of Assam in 1787,

2025
2025

Internal and Extemal Structure of the Earth 4

(ii) Earthquakes can cause severe and widespread damage to weak buildings or
structures, or to those located on ground subject to fault breakage, strong shaking. or
landsliding. The slip (movement) on the fault may break the surface of the Earth,
offsetting roads and tearing apart buildings or pipelines built across the fault. Such
damage can be spectacular, but it 1s limited to the vicinity of the fault.

(iit) Most damage resulis from strong shaking during the passage of seismic waves,
which spread out from the fault over a large region. Shaking may be severe enough
and long enough to collapse weak buildings, overturn furniture, topple water heaters
and storage tanks, and collapse unsafe dams. These effects can result in further
damage through fires resulting trom broken gas pipeline and fallen electric wires, the
loss of water to fight fires because of broken water lines, oil spills caused by failure
af storage tanks. and flooding resultmg from dam failure. Shaking can also cause
landslides. These in turn can damage buildings, roads, and pipelines built on slide
areas or downhill from them.

Tsunami

Tsunami is a Japanese term that means ‘harbor wave,’ Tsunamis are giant waves
caused by earthquakes or volcanic eruptions under the sea. Tsunamis have very
long wave lengths. Crest to crest they measure between 10 and 500 km and they
travel through the ocean at more than 700 kmh, Sometimes there appears to be
just one wave but often there are multiple waves travelling a few minutes apart.
Most tsunamis are caused by submarine earthquakes but not all submarine
earthquakes cause tsunamis. Movement on the fault must have a vertical component
that generates sufficient displacement to set a tsunami running. Earthquakes,
landslides, volcanic eruptions, explosions, and even the impact of cosmic bodies,
such as meteorites, can generale tsunamis. Tsunamis can savagely attack coastlines,
causing devastating property damage and loss of life. An under sea earthquake in the
Indian Ocean on 26th December 2004 produced a tsunami that caused one of the
biggest natural disasters in modern history. Over 200,000 people are known to have

Jost their Jives.

Task : In 2004 and 2011 there were two tsunamis in Asia. By group list the badly
effected countries,

54 Geography and Environment

Volcano

A yolcano is an opening in the crust of the Earth through which molten rock
known as magma and gases from the interior of the Earth reach the surface. The
definition of volcano can include layers of ash and lava
the mountain like structures that
may be created from the
material ejected at the volcano.
Magma erupting from a
volcano is called Lava and is the
material which builds up the
cone surrounding the vent
(fig. 4.4). This opening allows
hot ash, molten rock and gases
to blow off trom the
underground spaces. Voleanoes
generally acquire shape of a
mountain. Volcanoes are usually
found at places where tectonic Fig. 4.4: Voleano

plates get converged or diverged. But their existence at a particular place
depends upon many environmental and geological factors.

magzina chamber

Reasons of volcanic eruption

Volcanic activity frequently occurs at the boundaries of the Earth’s tectonic plates
which are a series of large blocks moving between each other. The movement of
these plates plays a significant role in the type of volcano formed, which influences
its shape.

1. Eruption of melted magma, hot ash, and molten rock gases from the underground
spaces causes volcanism.

2. When the pressure of the earth crust reduces underground rocks tum into liquid. As
atesult the volume of the rocks increases and the liquid lava comes out from the weak
earth crust and causes volcanism.

3. Sometimes the water of rivers, canals or seas enters through the crack of the earth
crust and evaporates for excessive heat and causes volcanism.

4. One kind of gas is created for the reaction of the underground heat and molten rocks
that create pressure and creates volcanism.

5. Hot liquid lava comes out for the pressure of the earthquake through the weak earth
crust and causes volcanism.

2025
2025

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 545

Types of volcano

On the basis of eruption there are three types of volcanoes ;

1, Active voleano : The volcanoes which are erupting or have erupted recently are

lmown as active voleano, Mauna Loa and Mauna Keya of Tlawati are the best
examples.

2. Dormant voleano : These volcanoes show no signs of activity. They have not
erupted for along time, A dormant volcano can be active again, Fujiama of Japan is a
dormant volcano.

3. Extinct yoleano : These volcanoes have remained dormant for many years
and all volcanic activities have stopped. Kohisultan of Iran is an extinet voleano.

Volcanoes classified on the basis of shape and size

1. Shield volcano : Shield volcanoes are dome shaped mountains with broad bases
and gentle slopes, commonly great in size. Shield volcanoes, formed when large
flows of lava spread rapidly from central vents or rows of vents. Mauna Loa of Hawaii
island is a shield volcano.

2. Strato volcano : It is formed as layers or strata of ash and lava from the erupting
volcano, Most strato volcanoes are irregularly shaped mountains formed by material
ejected from both central and other vents on the sides of the mountain.

3. Cinder cone volcano : Small volcanoes are called Cinder cone volcanoes.
They are formed as a result of repeated small explosions of gas rich magma, which
ejects small chunks of lava and ash onto small area around vent. The average size
of cinder cone is about 800 metres wide base, and 100 metres high. Paraculing of
Mexico is an example of cinder cone volcano.

Effects of volcanic eruption : Due to volcanic eruptions many changes occur on the
earth's crust.On the other hand, volcanos have some good impacts.Various dimensions
af volcanoes have been discussed below :

(1) Sometimes the molten materials are ejected from the volcano accumulated
in the surrounding places and form a plateau. Black soil plateau of South India is
formed from volcanic lava,

(2) There are many volcanoes in the ocean floor. Lava ejected from these volcanoes
produces island. These are known as high island. Hawaii archipelago in the Pacific
ocean is a voleanic island.

(3) Volcanic eruption can create a deep trench in the surface of the earth. In 1883
a deep trench developed due to volcanic eruption between Java and Sumatra.
56 Geography and Environment

(4) A lake is formed in the crater of an extinct volcano. Mount Adakama of
Alaska, Kosegaina of Nicaragua are this type of lakes.

(5) Lava flowing for a long time from the veleanic eruption forms mountain which is
known as the volcanic mountain. Vesuvius of Italy is a voleanic mountain.

(G) A voleanic plateau is produced by volcanic activity, Lava plateau is produced

by numerous successive eruptions through numerous vents.

Volcanic eruption destroys villages, cities. agricultural land, and everything. In

1879 AD eruption from Vesuvius mountain destroyed two cities of Italy Pompeii and
Herculeum.

Volcanoes not only destroy the cities and agricultural lands but also mcrease the
fertility of the soil. Layer of lava produces fertile black soil which is good for
producing cotton. Many mineral substances flow with lava which is useful for the
industrial activity.

Cause and effect of slow changes of the earth's surface

Sudden changes occur on the earth's surface and produce three types of landform. These
are : mountains, plateaus and plains.These landforms gradually change through natural
processes like solar heat. teraperature, wind and rain and transform into a different
landform.This process of change is known as slow change, In this process, solar heat,
wind and rain erodes the surface layer of the earth very slowly. As a result, rocks
of the upper layer of the surface break down. Rocks are eroded, transported and
again this process takes place and new layer of rock is broken down. In this way,
natural processes erode the surface.There are four processes through which the earth
surface is changing. These are :

a. Weathering and erosion

b. Transportation

ce, Denndation

d. Deposition

a. Weathering and erosion : Weathering is the process of decomposing the rocks.
Rock particles are loosened, chemically or mechanically and stays im place is called
Weathering.

When the rock particle is moved by some flowing agent such as air,water and ice it is
called Erosion.

2025
Internal and External Structure of the Earth S7

b. Transportation : Transportation is the movement of solid particles, typically due
to a combination of the force of gravity acting on the sediment and the movement
of the nvers, wind and glacier.

¢. Denudation : Denudation is the long term process of wearing of the earth's surface
leading to a reduction im elevation and relief of landforms and landscapes.
Denudation can involve the removal of both solid particles and dissolved materials.

d. Deposition : Deposition is the geological process by which material is added
to the landform or land mass. Eroded particles from wind, river and glacier are
deposited to a new place.

The natural processes through which gradual change in the landform occurs are
wind, rainfall, river and glacier, Erosional work of these agents are discussed below :

Wind : Air contains oxygen, carbon dioxide and water vapour. The chemical process
of these three elements break down the rocks. Erosional work of the wind is more
prorainent in the desert. Desert areas are dry, ramless and are without vegetation
coverage, Due to less vegetation coverage in the desert area the soil is not strongly
compacted, The solar heat inthe day time and radiation at night make the rocks
expand and contract. Asa result, the rocks_prone to become erosion. Wind blows
ihe loose rock particles from one region to another and slowly change the landform.

Rainfall: Rain water flowing on the surface of the land erodes it gradually in a large
seale. Flowing rain water erodes the rocks partially and loosened eroded rocks are
expanded, In high rainfall area the soils of cultivated lands are easily transported.
In mountainous areas hard rock lies on the clay layer in a slanting position, When
tainfall enters the cracks of the clayey layer of the mountain and erodes the hard
rocks they become unstable and eventually fall down as landslide. In this way
landforms change with the passage of time.

Glacier : Glacier is also an agent of change in cold region. The rocks underneath the
passage of the glacier are eroded while it moves. When glacier moves through
the vallev in the mountains the rocks are broken into smaller pieces and moved away
farther along its path. If there are cracks in the mountain sides water enters in those
cracks, freeze and loosen the rocks and the pressure of glacier erodes the rocks from
ihe sides of the mountain. This is the gradual process of change of the landform by
placier.

Forma-8, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
58 Geography and Environment

River :The natural process that is changing the earth's surface regularly is the river.
When the river flows through the mountainous region the velocity of the current
erodes the rocks into smaller pieces in the river bed and the sides of the mountain
walls, In the mountainous stage of the river the work of the river is only erosion.
When the river enters the plains it works both as an erosion and deposition agent. In
the river course where the river flows over soft rocks it makes its way on it by
erosion. Eroded materials are deposited in the course of the river and finally it reaches
the sea.

Definition of river : In the high mountain. plateau or highland where rainfall, spring.
glacier or melted waters from the glacier flow downwards due to gravitational force in
a fixed course 1s called a River. The river flows in a course through plains and reaches
at ocean or lake. The origin of the river is called the Source of river, The place
where the river reaches the ocean or lake called the Mouth of the river. The
extended area along the Mouth of the river is called the Estuary.

River course : River is important in the life of the people. All ancient civilizations
flourished beside the river. At that time river was the only medium through which
people could move around.

Doab : Land between two active rivers is known as doah,
Confluence: When two or more rivers meet together ala place is known as confluence.

Tributary : A stream or river that flows into a main stream or a lake is called a
Tributary, A tributary does not flow directly into a sea or ocean.

Distributary : A stream that branches off and flows away from a main stream
channel. They are common in the delta areas in the lower course of the river.

River valley : A valley formed by flowing river is called River valley,
River bed : The river bottom through which river flows is called the River bed.

River basin : The vast regions having branches of rivers through which water flows
from its origin and fall into ocean and lake are called River basin.

2025
2025

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 59

Life cycle of a river
On the basis of area, depth, slope, velocity from the source to the mouth of the river,
the life cycle of a river has been divided into three stages (fig. 4.5). These are :

l. Youthful stage/upper course

2. Mature stage‘middle course

3, Old stage/lower course

1. Youthful  stage/upper
course : Youthful stage/upper
course is the primary stage
of the river course. The upper

a ee cours he river j the

nue ie our & of the river is im h

i valley's upper origin in the mountain up to
= | COURSE : ;

Middle course reaching the plains. In the

_. Broad shape upper course or youthful

of valley a slage the main work of the

Fig. 4.5 : Life cycle of a river river is vertical erosion. In the
upper course the river erodes the landforms and transports it.

2. Mature stage/middle course : When the river enters the plains it is called the
work starts. [n Mature stage. In the mature stage the velocity of the river reduces and
the deposition this stage lateral erosion is more than vertical erosion, In mature stage
alluvium is deposited on the banks of the river which eventually forms the alluvial
plains. Majority of lands in Bangladesh is alluvial plains.

3. Old stage/lower course : Lower course is the last siage of a river where it
reaches the ocean. At this stage velocity of the river decreases. There is no vertical
erosion and very less lateral erosion. River is very wide and shallow. Due to
decrease of velocity of river flow, alluvium is deposited at the river mouth forming
deltas.

Landforms Created by river

“V" shaped valley : In the upper course of the river due to high velocity large
rocks are broken down and transported downwards, Mountains are formed with
60 Geography and Environment

hard and soft rocks. In the river
course soft rocks are eroded
more and cutting downwards

makes the channel shape like a

“VW” The sides of the mountains are

less eroded as the lateral erosion Aig AG Viahaped valley

at this stage is less (fig. 4.6).

Gorge and canyon :A gorge is a narrow valley
with steep rocky walls located between hills or
mountains. Rivers carve through hard layers of
rock, breaking down or eroding. Sediment from
the worn away rock is then carried downstream,
Over time, this erosion will form the steep walls
of gorge (fig. 4.7). The Indus river gorge is 518
metres deep, one of the deepest in the world.

Canyon :

Canyon is a steep sided valley where depth is considerably greater than width. These
features are the result of nver erosion m the upper course of the river in dry region. In
North America Grand Canyon is the largest in the world which 137-157 metres
wide, approximately 2.4 kilometres deep and 482 kilometres long.

Waterfall : Waterfalls are found in the upper
course of the river. They happen when there
is a piece of hard rock overlayig a soft
rock which the river cannot erode. Soa,
water has to drop from a high place to a
low place (fig. 4.8). Most waterfalls are
small but the biggest waterfalls are
hundreds of metres high. In North America
Niagara falls in the Lawrence river has been
formed this way.

2025
2025

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 61

Landforms from river deposition

Alluvial cone and alluvial fan: An alluvial fan is a fan shaped or cone shaped
deposit of gravel, sand and smaller materials. When water flows down a mountain,
it picks up sand and other materials from the mountain. When the water reaches the
base of the mountain and spreads out onto flat land, that material is deposited. As the
materials builds up over ime, an alluvial fan/and alluvial cone is created (fig. 4.9).
Tn the foothills of Himalaya tributaries of Ganges forms these types of alluvial fans.

Piedmont alluvial plain : Mountainous
river deposits sediments at the
foothills of the mountains. These
deposits gradually form extensive
plains. These type of plains are known as
piedmont alluvial plains (fig. 4.10). fo
Adjacent areas of the rivers Tista, SSS
Karatoa and Atrai in Rangpur and Fig. 4.10 : Piedmont alhivial plain
Dinajpur regions of Bangladesh are known as the piedmont alluvial plains.

These rivets originated in the Himalayas and brought sediments from the mountaimous
region and deposited in those region forming the piedmont alluvial plains.

Flood plain: A flood plain usually is a flat area with areas of higher elevation on both
sides. Flood plains can be very small or very large. Small flood plains sometimes
62 Geography and Environment

are part of a Valley. Large flood plains
can almost take up entire country.
Flood plains usually are very fertile
agricultural areas (fig. 4.11). Floods
carry sediment rich in nutrients. They

spread that sediment to a wide
atea. Flood plains are flat and have
, relatively few rocks or other large
Fig. 4.11 : Flood plain obstacles that may prevent

farming. Floods are usually seasonal and can be predicted months ahead of time.

Delta; Deltas form as rivers empty their water and sediment into another body of
water, such as an ocean, lake, or another river, A river moves more slowly as it nears
its mouth, or end, This causes sediment, solid material carried downstream by
currents, to fall to the river bottom.

‘a The heavier, coarser material settles
ax " first. Smaller. finer sediment is carried
= " farther downstream. The finest material
Ey. is deposited beyond the river mouth.
Fe This material is called Alluvium or Silt.

Silt is full of nutrients that help
microbes and plants grow. As the
sili builds up, new land is formed.

Not all rivers form deltas. For a deliato

form, the Now of a river must be slow

Bay of Bengal and steady enough for sill to be
Fig, 4.12 : Delta deposited and build up. Because many

river deltas have a triangular shape, the term delta comes from the upper- case

Greek letter delta, which is shaped like a triangle (fig. 4.12).

External structure of the earth

The diversified outward appearance of the earth is known as the external structure of
the earth, Some principal and important examples are described below.

Main landforms of the earth

Earth's topography is made up of many different types of landforms. While the
planet is covered primarily with water, the three major types of landforms are
mountains, plains and plateaus. These can be formed by a variety of natural forces,
including erosion from water and wind, plate movement, folding and faulting, and
volcanic activity.

2025
2025

Tnternal and External Structure of the Earth 63

Mountains

While most mountains are created due to the slow and gigantic movement of the
earth's tectonic plates, some are formed as a result of erosion and volcanic activities.
Mountains are characterized by a higher elevation as compared to the surrounding
areas. They are higher than 600 metres, and taller and steeper than the hills, The
world’s tallest mountains The Himalayas are located in Asia and the largest range
of mountains is present in the Atlantic ocean. You will be surprised to know that

some of the highest mountaim peaks are located deep in the oceans. There are some
mountain which is not a part of a mountain range but exists in isolation such as
Mount Kilimanjaro in East Africa.

Mountains : types and their formation

An elevated landform is identifiedas a mountain. IL has a summit and there are slopes
on its sides,They are basically made wp of earth and rock materials. Regarding
mountain formation, the outermost layer of the earth or the earth’s crust is
composed of six tectonic plates. When two plates move or collide with each
other, vast land areas are uplifted, resulting in the formation of mountains.
Depending upon the geological processes responsible for uplift of mountains and
landform characteristics.There are four major types of mountains.

Fold mountains : Fold mountains

are the most common type of
mountains. They are formed due
to collision of two plates, causing
fold that descends on both
folding of the earth's crust. The
sides is called Anticline, whereas,
the fold that ascends from a
common low point (on both sides)
is called Synchne (fig. 4.13).
Examples of fold mountains are

the Himalayas located in Asia,
Rocky mountains located in North

America, and the Alps located in
Europe. Fig. 4.13 : Fold mountains

64. Geography and Environment

Task : Collect information on famous fold mountains of the world and write il
down.

Voleanic mountains: Volcanic mountains are created due to volcanic eruptions. When
this lava erupts and piles up on the surface of the earth, it cools and solidifies to form a
volcanic mountain. It is also called depositional mountain. In many instances, the volcanic
Volcanic Mountation 9%. materials erupt to great heights
re Active Veleano due to pressure from under the
earth's crust (fig. 4.14). Examples
Pizins “ of volcanic mountains are the

be. Mount Fujiyama in Japan.
Mount Vesuvius in Italy and
Mount Pimatubo in Philippines.

Fig. 4.14 : Volcanic mountains

Fault-block mountains: Due to tectonic movement in the earth's surface contraction

and expansion of rocks takes place. This movement creates cracks in the earth’s
Fibres lew arvbiolin

surface which leads to Block Mountain oy Plaine

displacement of the earth's
surface. It is called Fault.
Fault mountains or fault-block
mountains are created when
blocks of rock materials slide

along faults in the earth's crust.
There are two types of block
mountains, viz., the lifted and tilted. In the former type, the mountain has two
steep sides, whereas, the tilied type has one steep side and a gentile sloping side

Fig. 4.15 ; Fault-block mountains

(fig. 4.15). Examples of fault-block mountains are the Vindhya mountains and
Satpuras mountain in India, Salt mountain in Pakistan and Black forest of Germany.

Dome/Laccolith mountains : Dome mountains are built when the hot magma rises

from the mantle and uplifts the overlying sedimentary layer of the earth’s crust. In

2025
Internal and External Structure of the Earth 65

the process,the magma is not actually
erupted, but it cools down and

CASES : hardens. thereby forming the core of

Sens meee tsy «6the mountain, As their appearance

. n resembles a dome shape, they are

4 PF ROS Fi cte;Aae/| Called Dome Mountains or Laccolith
rrerri Mountains (fig. 4.16). These
Fig. 4.16; Laceolith mountains mountains do not have any summit.

Example of dome mountains are the Black Hills Mountam of Dakota state and the
Henry mountain of Utah state in USA.
Plateaus

Plateaus are formed by various geologic activities, such as immense lava flows,

uplifting due to tectonic plate collisions, and sediment plateaus formed from

eroded matenal from mountains.
Plateaus are lower than mountains Plateau
but higher than plains with steep
slopes and extensive undulating
surface is known as plateau (fig. 4.17).
The height of the plateau varies from
few hundred metres to few thousand

metres. The height of the highest
plateaus of the world varies from

4270-5190 metres.

Fig. 4.17 : Plateaus

On the basis of the location, plateaus can be classified into three categories :
1. Intermontane plateau

2. Piedmont plateau

3. Continental plateau

Forma-9, Geography and Environment. Class 9-10
66 Geography and Environment

1. Intermontane plateau :This type
of plateau is surrounded by
mountains. The Tibetan plateau is

Fold Mountain Peak Fold Mountain Paak

an intermontane plateau where The
Kunlin mountain is in the north,
The Himalayas in the south and in
the east and west there are

mountains. Bolivia in South America, — [|
Mexico in Latin America, and Fig. 4.18 : Intermontane plateau
Mongolia and Tarim in Asia is this type of plateau (fig. 4.18).

2. Piedmont plateau: When high mountains are eroded and the sediments are
deposited at the foothills and creates plateau is known as piedmont plateau. Colorado
in Norih America and Patagonia in South America are the piedmont plateaus.

3. Continental plateau : Extensive highland surrounded by sea and lowlands is
called Continental Plateau, These type of plateaus have no link with the mountain,
Examples are Spain, Australia, Saudi Arabia, Greenland and India.

Plains
Extended lands with gentle slope a bit high from the sea level is called plain land. The
plains are formed by the erosional and depositional work of different land forming

agents like river, glacier and wind. Gently sloping and undulating land is suitable for
agriculture. settlement and road construction.

On the basis of origin the plains are classified into two categories ; Erosional
and depositional plains.

Erosional plains : This type of plains are formed for erosion by river, wind and
glacier. The upper rocks are eroded gradually and the lands with steep slope are
transformed into plains. ‘The plains at the foothills of Appalachian mountains and the
plains of Finland and Siberia are these type of plains. The Barind and the Madhupur

Tract of Bangladesh are examples of erosional plains.

2025
2025

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 67

Depositional plains : Natural processes of river, wind and glacier transport the sand
dust and sediment, from one place and deposit in a lowland forming a depositional
plain. Formation of depositional plains are found from the mountainous region to the
sea coast. River can form valley such as the valley of Nepal. It can form alluvial fan
al the foothills of the mountains by deposition. In the middle course of a river, where
velocity of the river is reducedsit overflows the banks causing flood during rainy
season and the sediments are deposited gradually on both sides of the river forming
a plain land which is known as flood plain. Flood plains of Dhaleswari and Jamuna
are of these type. A plain land formed at the mouth of the river through deposition
is known as Delta. Ganges delta is located in the southern part of Bangladesh.
Plains are also formed in the coastal areas by the activity of ocean current. These
are known as coastal plams. Coastal plain of Bangladesh stretches from Feni river to
Teknaf, Plains are also formed by the deposition of glacial moraines in the cold
regions of the world. The Prairie of Canada are formed from the glacial deposits,

Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. The origin of graphite is—
a. Limestone b. Coal
c. Sandstone d. Granite

2. At the lower stage of a river —
i. flow increases.
ii, depth decreases,
ili. bank erosion decreases.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii

c. iand ii d. itiand ii
68 Geography and Environment

Answer the questions number 3 and 4 from the following Ngures :

3) Where is figure 1 type of landform seen in Bangladesh

a. in south-east region b. in south-west region

c. imnorth-west region d. im north-east region

4. Both figure | and figure 2 types of landform are formed—
i. by sedimentation.
ii, atthe estuary.
il. by erosional process.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. Land ii b. Land tii

ce tiandiii d. i, uand it

2025
2025

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 69

Creative questions

1,

Bidhan and Himel went to Ilalyas migrants. One day al afternoon they have seen a
surface area with high slope and shaped almost like a cone. While they were

talking they have come to know that Bidhan came from Bandarban and Himel
came from Khulna of Bangladesh.

a. What is river valley?
b. Whyis ariver valley shaped like “V' al ils upper stage? Explain.

c¢. Explain the phrysiographical structure of the landforms seen by Bidhan
and Himel,

d. Give a comparative analysis of the landforms of those two regions from where
Bidhan and Himel have come.

a, What is mineral?
b. Why do fossils exist in sedimentary rock? Explain.
c. Explain the characteristics of “A’ stratum.from the above figure.

d. Is there any difference in the structural formation of ‘B’ and
‘C’ stratum’? Explain.
