CHAPTER TEN

Assistance for Entrepreneurship Development

Different types of assistances are necessary to take initiative to establish a
business firm. These assistances motivate the entrepreneur to set up the business
or industry and operate them successfully. In this chapter, we shall learn about
various assistances provided by Bangladesh Industrial policy, different
Government & private commercial banks and non-government development
organization,

After reading this chapter, we shall be able to —

Explain the concept of Assistance.
Mention the types and sources of assistance for business in Bangladesh.
Describe the types of assistance mentioned in the Industrial Policy.

Describe the types of assistance provided by Bangladesh Small and Cottage
Industries Corporation.

Describe the types of assistance provided by the commercial banks.

Describe the types of assistance provided by the Non Government
Development Organizations.

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-17
130

Business Entrepreneurship

Concept of Assistance for Entrepreneurship

To start a new business or indusiry is a creative and structural job. But, risk
is also involved wiih this. As a result, nobody wants to come forward to take
this job. For this reason various assistances are necessary. Assistance
favoring motivates a potential entrepreneur to set up business or industry and
tun it smoothly. On the basis of nature of assistance, it is classified in three
types: Motivating, Supporting and Preserving. Motivating assistances
include different types of training, awareness of opportunities for investment,
huge campaign of government support relating to establishing industries,
technical and economic information sharing and providing consultancy. With
the help of supportive assistance, the entrepreneur gets facilities related to
establishing industries. operation, utilizing assets and other benefits.
Registration, supply of capital, infrastructural support, tax holiday, subsidy
etc. are mentionable supportive assistances. On the other hand, preserving
assistances include the supports to remove the hindrances to maintain the
operational activities and expansion of business.

Sources of assistances in Bangladesh like other countries of the world,
various government and non-government institutions have been formed
which are helpful for business entrepreneurship and setting up business and
there are contributing to trade and commerce. There institutions provide
necessary direction and assistance for entrepreneurship of business and
incustry, setting up industry and marketing goods in the country. Besides,
various helpful aspects of business entrepreneurship have been mentioned in
National Industrial Policy which can be motivational for many people.

A list of such institutions is given below:

Sources of Assistances

Bangladesh Small and Cottage Industries Corporation
Bangladesh Development Bank Limited

Commercial Banks

Bangladesh Industrial Technical Assistance Centre
Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research.
Directorate of Youth Development
Directorate of Women Affairs

Non Government Development Organization

a Sp tke fe

20235
2025

Assistance for Entrepreneurship Development 131

Bangladesh Small & Cottage Industries Corporation

BSCIC has been working as a main assisting body for the development of the small and
cottage industries Bangladesh, The corporation is supervised under the Ministry of
Industry. The main objective of this corporation is to provide invesment advice for the
development of this kind of industries. Other assistances provided by BSCIC are as
follows:

¢ Providing information related to industries
e Selecting entrepreneur

e Development of industrial entrepreneurship
® Selecting of project

* Evaluation of project

e Infrastructural development

® Management and Efficiency Development
« Designing of Product

e Assistance in Supplying Raw Materials

« Assistance in distribution of finished goods
« Registration of Small and Cottage Industries

For the above mentioned assistances and any other advice for setting up an industry, an
entrepreneur has to communicate with the district BSCTC Industry st Assistance
Center. according to Banglade economie servay 2023-2024. According to Bangladesh
economic servay 2023-2024 we had 82 BSCIC industrial area, training institute and
6135 factories in our country. 8.2 lac people are working in these factories.

Bangladesh Development Bank Limited

Bangladesh Development Bank Limited (BDBL) is a complete state owned
commercial bank. BDBL started operation since 3rd January 2010 combining
Bangladesh Shilpa Bank and Bangladesh Shilpa Rin Shangstha. Besides
commercial banking this bank provides financial and technical support to the
government and private industries. The main task of BDBL is to extend loan and
provide advise to the entrepreneur for rapid industrialization in the country for
setting up new industries, modernizing existing industries, changing of
machineries and expansion of business and patronizing agro based industries.
132 Business Entrepreneurship

The mentionable assistances provided by BDBL are as follows:

a. Priority of the Small Entrepreneur

It is undeniable to acknowledge the role played by the small and medium
enterprises (SME) for the total economic development of a developing country
like Bangladesh. The sector being labor intensive can immediately contribute to
increase national income and employment generation. SMEs are called
‘Employment Generating Machine’, Between the small and medium enterprises
in our country; entrepreneur and entrepreneurship for small enterprises have
more potentiality for employment generation, reduce unemployment and
ensuring economic growth. In this connection, as per direction from Bangladesh
Bank, the branches of BDBL extends 40% loan favoring small entrepreneurs of
their total loan budgeted for SME sector. The rest amount is distributed among
the medium entrepreneurs.

b. Prioritizing the Manufacturing and Service Sector: Bangladesh
government has given priority to manufacturing and service industry over trade
to ensure employment generation and enhancement of production. As a result,
the branches of BDBL have to make loan favoring manufacturing industries and
agro based service industry.

c. Priority of the Women Entrepreneur: Any woman who is proprietor of sole
proprietorship firm, partner in a partnership firm and owner of 51% share in
Joint Stock Company. can be called a women entrepreneur. 50 percent of the
total population in Bangladesh is women. Involvement of the women in to the
mainstream of economy is necessary for sustainable economic development of
the country due to existing population structure. Our women have honesty,
interest, creativity and work efficiency. Specially, their activities in micro credit
and continuous participation in garments industry has a vital role for
industrialization, For this reason, BDBL has been extending more loan facility
with simple terms for the small and medium industry women entrepreneurs.

Commercial Banks

The six nationalized commercial Banks (Sonali, Janata, Agrani, Rupali, BASIC & BDBL)
and Bangladesh Krishi Bank with help of their branches all around the country have
been providing financial services to industry and business entrepreneurs,
Specially, they have taken initiatives to quicken the expansion of small and
medium enterprises and business with a view to the development of labor
intensive and employment generating economic development. The Sonali Bank
Limited as a development partner of the government has been providing various

£023
Assistance for Entrepreneurship Development 133

services to sole proprietorship, partnership, private limited companies and
public limited companies for the development of SME sector. The loan limit
varies from Taka 50 thousand to Taka 10 crore depending upon the nature of
industry or business. The term of the loan is fixed on the basis of the project. The
tenure is one year for working capital and three to seven years for term loan. The
prerequisites to avail the loan are as follows:

* The entrepreneur must have two years of experience

e The entrepreneur must be sound, educated and age should be between
18 to 60 years

e Defaulters, Bankrupt, Insane and dim-witted can not apply for the loan
e The entrepreneur should be Bangladeshi

* Women entrepreneur will be given priority
Bangladesh Small Industries & Commerce Bank Limited -BASIC

BASIC Bank Limited was incorporated in 1988 under the Company Act 1913 of
Bangladesh and commenced its business from 31st January 1989. At present, it
has been operating under the Bank Companies Act 1991. Though, the bank was
established for financing the small enterprises, at present it provides both
commercial and developmental services, As per Articles of Association of the
Bank, it is committed to invest 50% of its allowable fund to the Small and
Cottage Industries, The Bank is mainly financing the entrepreneurs of Small and
medium enterprises. The sectors are mainly Ready Made Garments and Agro
Based Industries, such as Poultry, Engineering, Food and Food Based Industries,
Chemical Industries, Pharmaceutical Industries, Paper and Board Mills, Printing
and Packaging Industries, Leather and Jute Industries. A chart of industrial loan
provided by BASIC Bank limited for the last several years is given below:

Year Crore Taka
2005 998.75
2006 1224.35
2007 1390.14
2008 1722.64
2009 1782.54
2010 2777.79
2011 3332.31

a Source: BASIC Bank Limited
a
134 Business Entrepreneurship

Bangladesh Industrial Technical Assistance Centre -BITAC

This institution has been established for industrial development and economic
changes specially to increase the industrial production. Assistances provided by
this organization are training for developing technical and managerial
efficiency, introducing new machineries and design and advising to solve
problems in installation of new machineries. Besides, it has publications,
seminar, group discussion, fair and movie show for spreading the technological
knowledge. BITAC has been operated through its four regional office. The
centers are located at Dhaka, Chattogram, Chandpur and Khulna. At present,
work is going on to set up another center at Bagura.

Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research

Bangladesh council for Scientific and Industrial Research has been established
in 1973 to become self sufficient in industrialization. The main objective of the
council is to research on the problems related to science, industry and
technology for setting up new industry, to encourage new research and provide
consultaney in operating research. The council invents and innovates new things
in industrial sector, provides guideline for scientific and industrial research,
innovates new product and process. An entrepreneur can coramercially produce
the invention or product invented by the council and contributes to the
production.

Directorate of Youth Development

Directorate of Youth Development under the Ministry of Youth and Sports
operates many activities for the self-employment of youth and women. The
directorate has many training institutes all over the country. Various training on
such as small business, agricultural farm, Horticulture, Apiculture, Cattle
raising, Aquaculture, Computer learning, Office management, Sewing and
Embroidery are given to the educated and less educated youths. Besides, it also
arranges to supply capital at a low interest.

Directorate of Women Affairs

The directorate of women affairs provides various training and credit facilities to
the women entrepreneurs of towns and villages for their prospect of creativity,
self-employment and empowerment. Their training includes poultry farming,
cattle raising, handicrafts, boutique works. sewing. weaving, etc.

2025
2025

Assistance for Entrepreneurship Development 135

Non Government Organizations -NGOs

Non Government Organizations are playing a significant role for development
of entrepreneurship. These organizations help the poor and lower class people
from villages to be entrepreneur. Among the numerous NGOs in Bangladesh, the
role of BRAC is most important.

Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee - BRAC

BRAC is the largest NGO in Bangladesh as well as all over the world as per
statement made in 2010. After our independence, this organization was
established in 1972 under the leadership of Mr. Fazle Hassan Abed. At first it
was working on grants and rehabilitation only. But, now it is working with
various programs on poverty alleviation and women empowerment. At present,
it is working in all 64 districts in Bangladesh. The activities performed by BRAC
for the development of entrepreneur are as follows:

1, Activities to develop small industries: Activities include weaving,
pouliry farming, furniture making, oil producing, molasses
manufacturing. rope making, making things from bamboo and cane, rice
making

2. Development of Associate Organization: Under this program the land
less people are organized through project planning, implementation,
management and distribution activities.

3. Developing the Manufacturing Unit: The quality and production of
village based industrial product are developed through art design and
technology. Besides, BRAC is also working to develop the traditional
crafts such as Silk, Jamdani, Nakshi katha etc. BRAC has its own dairy
farm and chain shop (Aarong).

Various Items of BRAC operated Aarong
136 Business Entrepreneurship

Micro Industries Development Assistance Service - MIDAS

As a private deyelopment organization MIDAS provides financial, technical
and management related assistance to the entrepreneur of the small and
medium enterprises. Overall activities of MIDAS are —

1. Extending loan facility to small and medium industries

2. Providing training, information and advice to the national,

multinational, government and non government organizations.
3. Continuing investigation and research in business
4. To increase the network of cooperation among entrepreneurs.

5. Assisting in marketing of goods produced by small and medium
enterprises to national and international market

Proshika

Proshika has been contributing a lot to the development of small industries in
Bangladesh, Proshika has been introducing many new profession related to
Agro Industries, Weaving, Silk producing, Handicrafis, Catile raising, Bee
hiving, plant growing etc. The entrepreneurs who have come forward in these
jobs, Proshika has provided them with training and loan,

Thengamara Mohila Sabuj Sangha-TMSS

Thengamara Mohila Sabuj Sangha-TMSS started work in 1980 in northern
district Bogra. At present its work has spread all over the country. It mainly
provides loan assistance, training and self employment to poor and landless
women. It also provides loan assistance to small entrepreneurs for grocery,
poultry farming, fish cultivation, horticulture and cottage industry.

Various Assistances as per Industrial Policy 2010

Motivating} « Adoption of various activities for the development of
entrepreneurship culture so that both the men and women
can identify themselves as an agent for changing the
economic condition of the society.

* Acknowledgement of the successful entrepreneurs, To
observe National Entrepreneurship Day, inclusion of
entrepreneurship development in the curriculum of school,
college and university

e Subject related to nation building and development should

be included in the curriculum of primary and secondary

2025
Assistance for Entrepreneurship Development 137

level and motivating them to make the youth of the
country aware of the different aspects of life struggle,
development of the country and = success, limited
infrastructural asset with a view to developing human
resources at the primary and secondary level of education.

Supporting

To award the inventor of new technology to ensure
addition of new technology in the industry for additional
development of industrial products. Technical training,
technology invention, technology development, transfers
of technology and selecting appropriate technology and
implementing them with a view to assisting the factories
with strengthening the BITAC and other organizations.

To create opportunity to work simultaneously of the local
machineries manufacturer and technology based
institutions to ensure easy availability of local and
appropriate technology at a cheaper rate for the local
investors especially investors of micro, cottage and small
industries.

To provide tax holiday as the following ways to the
companies which have started commercial production
within 30.06.2012:

i) Industries established in Dhaka and Chattogram (excluding
districts in the hill tracts) division shall enjoy tax holiday of
100% for first two years, 50% for the next two years and 25%)
on the last year.

il) Industries established in Rajshahi, Khulna, Sylhet, Barishal
and Rangpur Division and Districts of Hill tracts Tax Holiday
is seven years. 100% Tax Holiday is for the first three years
and 50% for the next three years and 25" for the last year.

Preserving

To give priority to the women entrepreneur in the service
sector such as ICT, Laundry, Tourism, Beauty Parlor,
Advertising Firm, etc. and other sectors like Aquaculture,
Agro and Handicrafts, Live Stock raising, and Food
Processing etc.

To provide special incentives to assist in small, medium and
cottage industries, protecting weaving industry, establishing
Silk Palli like Benarasi and Jamdani Palli. More over,
assistance to be provided to the weavers, Black smith,
potter, pottery, bamboo, cane, tama, kasa and pati industry.

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Fornma-1é

Business Entrepreneurship

EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)

1, Which one is Supporting Assistance?
a. Advising b. Providing Information
c. Supply of Capital d. Modernization of Business

2. Why people do not want to come forward to establish industries?
a. It requires creativity b. The task is formal
c- Risk is to be taken in this job d. It requires own capital

After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3 & 4:

Mrs. Nishat Afrin of Sylhet started a project in 2011 to make household utensils
with baraboo and cane. While being in the production process she faced financial
difficulties and took loan from a financial institution. Because of having Tax
Holiday facility, her business started improving day by day.

3. What is the amount of Tax Holiday for Ms. Nishat Afrin on her income
in the year 2015?
a. 100% b. 75%
c. 50% d. 25%
4. With the assistance from the financial institution-
i. Women entrepreneur in the country shall increase
ii. Development of large scale industries will be ensured
iii, Economic development of the country will be achieved
Which one of the following is correct?
ai & i b. i & iii
c. ti & iti d. i, ii & iti

Creative Question

1. Mr. Mehraj did not want to establish and operate a business considering the
risk and complexity associated with it. But, after hearing about the
government and non government assistances, he established garments
factory at Savar near Dhaka. He became successful within short time with the
help of his hard work and sincerity. Recently, it has become difficult for him
to sustain because of his competitors using high quality technology.

a. What is the percentage of women in the total population of Bangladesh?
b. What is the main job of BSCIC? Explain

20235
2025

Assistance for Entrepreneurship Development 139

c. Why does Mr. Mehraj become interested to set up the garment industry?
Explain.

d. Does Mr, Mehraj need any assistance? Give logic to your answer.

2. Ms. Saima Hoque used to perform challenging jobs from her childhood. She
established a 100% export oriented modern factory name 'Saima Food
Products in the Narayangon) BSCIC Area alter completion of her studies from
University. She has taken financial and technical support from an institution.
At present, 300 people are working in her factory.

a. What is the elaboration of BSCIC?
b. Explain the main task of the Directorate of the Women Affairs.

c. What government organization is engaged to support the entrepreneurs
like Ms, Saima? Explain.

d. Evaluate the role played by Ms. Saima for the over all economic
development of the country.
