2025

Chapter Six
Hydrosphere

Our knowledge regarding hydrosphere is limited. Since the number of population all
over the world is increasing day by day at an alarming rate with a decreasing rate of
resources on the land/biosphere, people are attracted towards the hydrosphere rapidly.

The reason behind this is the multidimensional structure of the ocean floor and its
abundant natural resources.

a? a"

aa
SSAA te
“SS

Hydrosphere of the earth

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to—
* explain the concept of hydrosphere;
* describe oceans, seas and bays;
® describe the topography of ocean floor and marine resources:
* explain the causes and effects of ocean currents;

* explain the causes and effects of low and high tide.
94 Geography and Environment
Concept of hydrosphere

“Hydro” means water and ‘sphere’ means the portion. It is known to all that water
exists all over the world. This huge volume of water exists in different parts
of the world in different forms —solid (ice). gasious (water vapour) and liquid.
Water exists in the atmosphere as a form of water vapour, on the surface as solid
and liquid and beneath the surface as liquid form. So, hydrosphere indicates the
distribution of the volume of water (Table 1). Oceans hold about 97 percent of total
volume of water (oceans, seas and bays). Rivers, glaciers, ground water, lakes,
soils,atmosphere and biosphere contain only 03 percent of water. The total volume
of water of the earth can be divided into two types, such as salt water and fresh
water. Salt water exists in all the oceans, seas and bays and fresh water in rivers, lakes
and under ground.

Table 1: Distribution of water and tts percentages

Name of location Volume Percentage

(ME * 1,00,000) (%)
Ocean 1370 97.25
Glacier 29 2.05
Ground Water 9.5 0,68
Lakes 0.125 0.01
Soil Moisture 0.065 0.005
Atmosphere 0.013 0.001
River 0.0017 0.0001
Biosphere 0.0006 0.00004

Ocean, sea and bay

The vast and open body of salt water of the hydrosphere is identified as ocean. There
are five oceans in the earth known as Pacific ocean, Atlantic ocean, Indian ocean,
NortherArctic ocean and Southern/Antarctic ocean (fig. 6.1). Pacific ocean is the
largest and deepest among the oceans (Table 2). Atlantic ocean is characterized

2025
Hydrosphere 95

with deep coastline and it creates a number of enclosed seas. Indian ocean is
encircled with Asia and Africa. The Southern ocean is located in between 60° north
latitude and the glaciers of the Antarctica. Antarctica continent is located in the
south of Southern ocean that is covered with ice round the year. Arctic sea is located

2025

in the northern part of north pole and is encircled with land mass.

Ei

Re
+" a i
4

Lan og

+

TDD = 2000 Kilometres
$4

SOUTHERN OCEAN

we

ea ye ee

oe a =

mere aaa 72 ANTARC IGA Bee

qzoac" 60" “0 atte DE ten, a ae eg
rida li cars si dl Rs

‘+ fe

teen bee
+. ee Cad
Pole te few o pate Cee 8a ta eee te

ee frre fee ote ee

Fig. 6.1 : Location of ocean in the world

Table 2: Area and average depth of the oceans

Oceans Area (square | Average Depth Location
kilometres) (metres)

Pacific ocean | 16 crore 60 lakh 4.270 Between Asia and America

Atlantic ocean 8 crore 24 lakh 3,932, America, Europe and Africa

Indian ocean 7 crore 36 lakh 3,962 Africa, India and Australia

Northern ocean 1 crore 50 lakh $24 North pole

Southern ocean) 1 crore 47 lakh 149 Between 60° north latitude and
the glaciers of the Antarctica

96 Geography and Environment

Seas are comparatively small, in volume of water than oceans. Mediterranean sea,
Red sea, Caribbean sea, Japan sea are the notable seas of the world. Water bodies enclosed
by land in three sides but open with a wide mouth in one side is called a Bay.

Examples are Bay of Bengal, Persian bay, Mexican bay etc. Water body surrounded
by land is called a Lake. Such as the Lake Baikal of Russia, the Lake Superior
in between the United States of America and Canada and the Lake Victoria of Africa.

Task + Indicate the location of the oceans in world map with a pointer to your class
mates.

Topography of ocean floor and marine resources

The ocean floor is as rough as the surface of the earth. The reason behind this is the
presence of volcano, ridges, highlands and trenches beneath the seas, By means of
sound wave the depth of the seas can be measured. This sound wave can be
traveled through water under 1475 metres deep and come back again, The
instrument named Fathometre is used to measure the depth. The land configuration
of the ocean floor can be divided into five classes (fig. 6.2) such as :

l. Continental shelf
2. Continental slope
3. Deep sea plains
4. Oceanic ridges

5. Oceanic trench

1. Continental shelf: A submerged border of a continent that slopes gradually and
extends to a point of steeper descent to the ocean bottom can be identified as a
continental shelf. The depth of the shelf is generally limited to water shallower
than 150 metres. The general gradient of the shelf is 1°.

2025
Hydrosphere 97

The average width of continental shelf is 70 kilometres. The innermost part of
continental shelf is called the Littoral Zone. The width of the continental shelf
varies considerably, — It
depends on the ruggedness

Coasi
Isand Ses Surface

brit

Coastal Gurr

of the coast. If the coast
represents a vast plain then
reah it creates a wide continental
| eenonaeasene 2 shelf. The presence of
pee eee bi ~—‘Geeanic Ridge hills or plateaus make the
continental shelf steeper.
Because of the existence of
vast plain at the north of
Europe, the continental shelf

‘Oueanic Trench

Liodo0 Mebes

Mariana Trench (10,870 Metres)

Fig, 6.2 ; The submarine relief 7 F i ;
gs © suormanme rene of Arctic ocean is very wide

(about 1.287 kilometres). But the widest continental shelf is located at the
north-western part of Europe. The second widest northem part of the continental
shelf can be seen at the eastern coast of North America, The western part of the coast
is much narrower than the east.[his is only because of the existence of folded Rocky
mountain. Since the major part of the continent of Africa is like a plateau, the easter
and wesiterm continental shelves are very narrow.

The reason behind the formation of continental shelves is the subduction of
continental margins or the variahon of sea level. Besides these. wave actions
also help to produce continental shelf.

2. Continental slope : The continental shelf is linked to the ocean floor by a steep
slope known as the continental slope. The slope descends steeply almost to the
bottom of the ocean. The depth of the continental slope starts from 200 metres and
stretches up to 3,000 metres. Because of its steepness this portion of ocean floor is
not wide like the continental shelf. The average width varies from 16 to 32
kilometres. The surface of continental slope is not smooth. Oceanic trenches
produce the rough surface.The deposition of corals and sediments can be found in

gentle sloping areas of continental slope.

Forma-13, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
98 Geography and Environment

3. Deep sea plains : The deep sea plains are broad and almost plain that extend
from the margin of continental slope. The average depth is 5,000 metres. The deep
sea plains are not flat as was formerly thought. This is because of the presence of a
huge number of highland and trenches on the deep sea plains. In certain areas
volcanic peaks tise steeply from these plains, and sometimes reach the surface
as isolated islands. Landforms produced by submarine volcanic activities or by

folding and faulting tend to keep their original form.

4. Oceanic ridges : Volcanoes can be found under water of the seas. Mid-oceanic
Ridges are found in places where the earth's tectonic plates are in constant
motion. When two adjoiming tectonic plates in motion produce a gap the uprising
magma fills the gap, so that new oceanic crust is formed. Mid-Atlantic ridge is a

well known submerged oceanic ridge.

§. Oceanic trench : Narrow topographic depressions can be found in sea floor. This
type of narrow, elongated. y-shaped depression in the ocean floor is known as
oceanic trench. Trenches have formed when two plates come into contact and the

denser of the two sinks below the other plate. The average depth of the trenches is
above 5,400 metres.

Most of the trenches can be found at the western part of the Pacific ocean. Mariana
is the deepest trench which is located 322 kilometres south-west of Guam island
in the western Pacific ocean. The average depth of Mariana trench is 10,870
metres and is the deepest trench of the world. Other notable trench are Puerto

Rico Trench in Atlantic ocean (8,538 metres) and Sunda trench in Indian ocean.

Task : Write down the characteristics in the table (in groups),
Continental | Continental Deep sea Oceanic Oceanic
shelf | slope plains ridges trench

2025
2025

Hydrosphere

Ocean currents

99

The regular movement of water from one part of the ocean to another is called
Ocean currents. Ocean currents are mainly caused by the difference of density of
sea water and wind force. A change in density is due to the variations in

Celd Current
Warm Curent == ==:

Fig. 6.3 : Warm and cold currents of Atlantic ocean

temperature and salinity.
Ocean currents can be
classified into two types
based on temperature
such as : A, Warm
currents and B, Cold
currents (fig. 6.3).

A. Warm currents :
The temperatures are
higher at the Equator
than that of Poles. The
water In the ocean near

the Equatorial region is
heated more than the

Polar region. The warm

waters of the Equatorial
regions are light and
move along the surface
towards the Polar
regions which is called
the Warm currents.

B. Cold currents : The cold current originates from the Polar region. The cold
water is dense and heavy. [t sinks downwards from the surface and moves

slowly towards the Equator is called the Cold currents.

Causes of ocean currents

I. Planetary winds : Circulation of planetary winds is the prime cause of ocean

current. These winds control the direction and speed of ocean currents. Trade winds,

Westerly's and Polar winds create the major ocean currents (fie. 6.4).
100 Geography and Environment

2. Rotation of the earth \ V anne
Earth's rotation results in the NAVAN
Ferrel’s Law which also F

influences ocean currents. This
phenomenon causes ocean

i

nit =

North Equatorial
Trade Wind \\

Current

currents in the Northern Equatiarial HA iY
Hemisphere to bend to the « —— AN of
; ; | South Equatecial NN KY
right and in the Southern Gurren AW errr
Hemisphere to the left. \ \\ KY
3. Variation of ocean water NN i
temperature : Variations in eran ts

d t ial ? | Anti Trade Wine! |
temperature produce equator , \ Veet

warm water and flows toward
the poles as surface warm
currents. On the other hand, cold and dense water flow from the poles to the
equatorial region as cold under currents.

Fig, 6.4: Impact of wind on ocean currents

4. Melting of polar ice caps : Melting of polar ice caps expands the volume of

water that lessens salt in the water. This less salty water helps to generate ocean
currents.

5. Variation of ocean depth : Temperature of ocean water depends on the variation
ofocean depth. The water volume in shallow depth warms quickly and swells up.
Then the deep sea water cools and go downward. These produce warm and cold
ocean currents. The speed of surface flow is very high. The speed of ocean current
decreases below 100 metres.

6. Density of water caused by salt : Salty water is denser than less salty water: cold
water is denser than warm water. Less dense water tends to rise while denser water
tends to sink.

7. Existence of land mass : The existence of continent, islands and any other
land mass protect, lessen and divert the flow of water. In most of the times
this bifurcates ocean currents.

2025
2025

Hydrosphere 101

Influence of ocean currents

The influence of ocean currents is mmportant for dilferent reasons. The direct effects
of ocean currents is much higher on climate and trade in different regions of the earth.

(Wind movements create current , The cold and heavy water
on the surface of the seas and =| sinks and produces under-flow
flows direct to the poles from | of water.

the equatorial zone.

TT <)

ae a
Since the surface water moves, the The under-flow of water
water swells and takes the takes the space of low
space. pressure areas.
Me —

Flowchart : Surface and deep ocean current together produce convection
current that results the movement of water in the oceans.

1. Influence of warm ocean currents; Warm ocean currents increase the
temperature of any area. So, cold regions can be found warmer if warm ocean
current passes through that area. The ports can be usable round the year in those
areas. such as, Norway and the west coast of British islands are free from frost
during winter for warm gulf current. But, the east coast of Canada is covered with ice
having the same latitudinal location,

2. Influence of cold ocean currents : Winds blowing from a cold ocean current bring
down the temperatures in places, which would have been much hotter. The
California (cold) current, which flows along the western coast of USA, makes the
region much cooler than other places in the west coast at the same latitude.

3. Influence on transportation : Boats and ships can easily sail to the direction
of ocean currents. Warm ocean currents helps transportation rather than cold ocean
currents. North Atlantic ocean current help the major transportation routes in the
world. Extreme cold and icebergs is a barrier for movements of ships in cold ocean
currents. Ships sailing with a current gain speed, which helps to save fuel and time.
Ships moving against a current have less speed. Warm currents keep the Arctic
regions free from icebergs, which can be dangerous for ships.
102 Geography and Environment

4, Influence on weather : Surface currents are warm which carry water vapour. This
warm current makes heavy rainfall over the coasts. For example, the Gulf Stream
makes the north-west Europe much more temperate than any other regions in the
same latitude and makes heavy tainfall there. On the other hand, cold ocean current
makes the winds moisture free and produces less or no rainfall. For example, this
may create cold desert like Atakama in South America. This desert is due to the
cold Peruvian current.

5. Fog and storms : Variation of temperature can be found in small areas where
warm and cold ocean currents merge. Fog and cyclone can form storms in this area.
The movements of ships and air plane can be difficult. For example, the merging of
cold Labrador current with warm Gulf current in the eastern coastal area of North
America and the merging of cold Kamchatka and Bering current with warm Japan
current make bad weather conditions.

6. Creation of under water plateau : Warm currents melt the iceberg that
results the deposition of existing sands, grains and stones under the water. For a
long time the process makes under water plateau and highlands. Grand Bank of
Newfoundland, Dogger Bank of coastal British islands are the true examples.

7. Influence on commercial fishing : Places where cold and warm currents meet
are ideal breeding yrounds for Plankions. These are very small organisms, which are
foods for fishes. These regions support a great number of fishes. They have
developed into major fishing grounds of the world. Newfoundland on the eastern
coast of North America is the meeting point of the Gulf Siream and the Labrador
Current. It is ane of the major fishing grounds of the world.

8. Incidence from iceberg : The iceberg that float on the cold ocean currents hamper
the free movement of ships, For example, the famous ship of United Kingdom
‘Titanic’ sunk into the water in its maiden voyage colliding with an icebarg.

Causes of high and low tide

There are two prime causes of tides. These are : 1. The gravity of the sun and moon
and 2. Centrifugal force produced from rotation of the earth.

2025
