CHAPTER FOUR
Business Based on Ownership

We have already learned that business is the combination of all the activities
from manufacturing of various goods and services, distribution and all the
associated economic activities in order to make profit basically im a legitimate
way, Various demand aspects of the consumers. ownership, and mentality of the
businessmen, size and features are the reason for formation of different types of
business. In this chapter, we shall know about various types of business
organization and their aspects on the basis of ownership.

After completing this chapter, we will be able to

« Describe different types of business and legitimate features

Explain the definition, features, and advantages and disadvantages of
sole proprietorship firm

Explain the suitable area for sole proprietorship business and reasons for
the popularity of sole proprietorship business

Describe the idea, features, and advantages and disadvantages of
partnership firm

Explain the formation process of partnership firm

Explain the contents of the deed of partnership agreement

Explain the registration of a partnership firm and its advantages.

Talk about different types of partnership.

Explain the reasons for dissolution of partnership business

Describe the definition, features, Kinds advantages and disadvantages of
a joint stock company

Describe the formation process of joint stock company

Differentiate between public and private limited company

Describe the idea and features of cooperative society.

Explain the formation and principles of a cooperative society

Business Entrepreneurship. Class 9-10, Forma-6
42 Business Entrepreneurship

* Describe the importance of cooperative society in the light of the
socioeconomic aspect of Bangladesh.
* Give example of the idea of state run business and its features.

» Explain the Concepts and features of state enterprise in Bangladesh.

Different Types of Business on the Basis of Ownership

Different types of business have been formed on the basis of ownership and of
various features to meet up different demands of the people over the decades.
Though, there is similarity in the objective of earning profit, there are some
differences on the basis of nature, feature, area, size and activity among various
types of business organization. On the basis of ownership business can be
classified as the following categories:

1) Sole Proprietorship Business
2) Partnership Business

3) Joint Stock Company

4) Cooperative Society

3) State Enterprises

Concept of Sole Proprietorship Business

Sole proprietorship is the business formed, operated and controlled by single
person. Business in this world started at first on sole ownership. For this reason,
this is called the most ancient business firm. Considering the present scenario,
we can say that when a single person out of his own responsibility arranges
capital and forms and run business with the objective to make profit and smgly
shoulders the profit or loss of the company it is called a Sole Proprietorship
Business. Formation of sole proprietorship business is very easy. Any individual
can start this type of business with small sum of money of his/her own initiative.
Generally, size of this sort of company is small. But, the owner can employ more
than one personnel and engage more capital if necessary. There is not so much
limitations for sole proprietorship business under the law. Anybody can start the
business at any place whether it is in the village market, hat-bazar, road side or
in one's own house. But, in cities and towns the entrepreneur has to collect trade
license before starting business. Most of the business organizations in our
country are formed as sole proprietorship. Not only this, 80% of the business is
based on sole proprietorship in Europe and America. Generally, in our country,
the groceries, tea stall, vegetable shop and most of the retail shops are formed as
sole proprietorship firra.

20235
2025

Business Based on Ownership 43

Characteristics of Sole Proprietorship Business

Sole

Proprietorship Business is such type of business where entrepreneur,

owner, operator and supplier of fund is the same person and he/she singly bears
the risk, liabilities, profit and loss of the business/company. The characteristics
of sole proprietorship firm are mentioned below:

The owner is a single person in sole proprietorship farm who arranges to
supply the capital, operates the business and bears the risk.

Formation of this kind of business is very easy. Since, there is no legal
complexity, any one can form this if he/she wants.

This sort of business can be formed with less capital. The owner himself
supplies the capital. Generally, own savings, if necessary he/she can
borrow form friends, relatives and Banks and operate business.

In most of the cases, sole proprietorship is of small size. Because of less
capital and ownership of a single person, the size of the business is small.
In a sole proprietorship firm, the owner has to bear all the risk of the
business.

Sole proprietorship firm does not have a legal entity. Owner and the
business are same.

The owner bears all the responsibilities in this business. Thus, his liability
is unlimited. Ifnecessary, one may need to sell personal property to meet
up the business liability.

Because of the single ownership of the whole business, the owner enjoys
the whole share of profit. On the other hand, he has to bear al! the loss
singly.

The permanence of sole proprietorship business depends upon the
willingness of the owner. Because, to ran the business or to close the
business solely depends upon the willingness of the owner.

Activity-1: Identify the advantages and disadvantages of sole proprietorship
business analyzing its characteristics

Advantages of sole proprietorship Disadvantages of sole proprietorship
business business

6 Ld

s *

* s

* °

44

Business Entrepreneurship

Suitable Areas of Sole Proprietorship Business

Sole proprietorship business has been acknowledged amongthe under
developed, developing and developed countries of the world as the most ancient
form of business. Though it is the oldest business, it is still popular and has
survived the competition with large scale businesses. Sole proprietorship
business is popular to all because some of its features and advantages.
Suitable areas of sole proprietorship business are depicted below:

1,

There are many people who want to start a business but can not do so
because of not having sufficient fund in hand. Sole proprietorship is suitable
for the thousands of peaple interested in self-employment. Such as tea stall,
small food shop, cottage industry, pottery shop ete.

There ate some businesses which do not require much capital. Those
businesses are considered more appropriate for sole proprietorship Like
Betel Shop, Vegetable Shop.

The business having very low risk is suitable for sole proprietorship.
Because, low income people want to avoid risk, thus they like this sort of
business. Such as Rice shop, pharmacy etc.

There are some businesses which provide goods and services with demands
stipulated to a particular region or particular group of customer. Sole
proprietorship business is more suitable for that kind of business, Like
library in front of school, restaurant in front of a industrial factory.

Sole proprictorship business is formed for the business of perishable goods
such as fruits, vegetables, fish, meat etc.

Profession based business like Doctors, Architecture and lawyers and direct
service based business like Laundry, Saloon, Beauty Parlor, etc. are formed
as sole proprietorship business.

There are some business which depend on the changed taste, interest and
fashion of the customer. Sole proprietorship business is more suitable for
this kind of business. Such as tailoring.

Sole proprietorship business is suitable for business of goods and services
involved with individual efficiency, art and fame. Such as painting,
photography, jewelary, furniture and sweet shop.

Sole proprietorship business ts also suitable for agro based accessory
products. Such as trading of paddy. potato and other raw materials.

£023
2025

Business Based on Ownership 45

10. For publication of books, papers and news papers at local and national
level. business of sole proprietorship is more suitable

From the above analysis it is understood that sole proprietorship business can be
started at any time and at any place with individual initiative, independent
mentality and investment of less capital and labor. This business is free from
legal complexity and risk is also a lesser amount. On the other hand, sole
proprietorship business can supply with goods and services irom staying very
close to the consumers. As a result, though the business is the oldest one, it has
vast scope and popularity. In context of Bangladesh, considering the economic,
social. political and cultural condition, sole proprietorship business is the most
appropriate type of business. For which eighty percent of the business in
Bangladesh is formed based. on sole proprietorship. So, it is necessary to make
the process of getting loan and other government assistance easier to eliminate
the prevailing unemployment in the country and creation of new job opportunity
by motivating the youth of the society to form sole proprietorship business.

Activity 2: Considering the Characteristics, advantages and suitability of
sole proprietorship business, find out the reasons for its popularity

Causes of popularity of Sole Proprietorship Business

. .
. -
. .
. .
* *

Concept of Partnership Business

Because of all the stipulations of less capital, unlimited liability and narrow
scope of sole proprietorship business, despite being the oldest and popular
business form it became necessary to establish business enterprises on
partnership basis with widening scope and reducing risk. For this, more than one
individual come together combine their capital and capacity and form a new
type of business which is called partnership business. Mainly, parmership
business evolved to eliminate the deficiency of sole proprietorship business.
But, this business also has some problems, Dispute and distrust may rise
among partners specially, for distribution of profit, decision making, division of
tasks and responsibilities, determining partners’ relations to each other. As a
46 Business Entrepreneurship

result, deed of partnership and partnership act had to be introduced. In
Bangladesh, partnership business is operated under the Partnership Act 1932,
Generally, when more than one individual willingly comes together to form
business on the basis of partnership deed it is called partnership business. As per
Partnership Act 1932, 'more than one individual’ means minimum two and
maximum twenty partners. If the partnership is for banking business, then
maximum number of partners should not be more than ten. According to the
section 4 of the Partnership Act 1932 in Bangladesh, Partnership business is the
relation between individuals based on a deed with a view to sharing profit of a
business operated by all or by one on behalf of all. Those who build this type of
relation is called "partner" and altogether their business is called partnership
business.

Formation of Partnership Business

We have known that, Partnership business is one type of business with a
relationship between individuals based on an agreement where the business is
operated by all or by one on behalf of all. Formation of partnership business is
very easy like sole proprietorship business. There is no legal complexity in its
formation. At least two eligible persons entering into contract can start the
business. But there is no hard and fast rules that the agreement is to be written.
The existing partnership law of 1932 in Bangladesh did not make agreement and
registration mandatory. So, the business can be operated by oral agreement. But
to avoid legal procedures, contradiction, unreliability and mistrust among ithe
partners, the agreement needs to be written and registered. For this reason, the
agreement is treated as the main basis of partnership business. It is necessary to
collect a trade license from city corporation or municipality to start a partnership
business within existing rules of our country.

Characteristics of Partnership Business

In the present context, partnership business is as old as the sole proprietorship
business. But, partnership business has evolved to eliminate some limitations of
sole proprietorship business. Though. it has some similarities with sole
proprietorship business in nature, partnership business has some characteristics
which has made it different from sole proprietorship and other form of joint
ownership business. The characteristics of partnership business are analyzed
below:

2025
2025

Business Based on Ownership 47

l.

Formation of Partnership Business is very easy since there is no legal
complexity. More than one individual eligible to enter into contract can start
the business with an oral or written agreement. More than one individual
means minimum two and maximum twenty people. For banking business
the maximum number of member is ten.

The agreement between the partners works as the basis for the partnership
business. This business is formed, operated and controlled on the basis of
relation based on agreement. The agreement can either be oral or written,
registered or umegistered.

. The partners in the business supply thew fund according to the

agreement. Profit as well as loss of business is also distributed according to
the agreement. Profit as well as loss is distributed equally if there 1s no other
indication in the agreement. Some body may even become partner without
any investment if it is mentioned in the agreement. But, the liabilities of the
partners are unlimited by jointly and individually. This means, if the asset of
the company is not sufficient to meet up a particular liability then the
personal property of the partners shall be liable for this. If any partner
becomes bankrupt, then other partners shall be liable to bear his portion of
liability.

. The business is formed on the basis of reliability and trust on each other and

the success of the business is also dependent on this. On the other hand,
partnership business gets dissolved, if there is any unreliability, mistrust and
argument among the partners.

Registration of partnership firm is not mandatory. But, the registered
company enjoys some facility over the umegistered companies.
Registration does not make it a legal entity. So, the business can not be run
on its own name. It is considered that all the business transactions have been
made personally on behalf of the partners. The existence of this business
depends upon the willingness of partners since it has no legal entity.

Activity 3: Analyzing the concepts and characteristics of partnership
business; find out advantages and disadvantages

Advantages of partnership business | Disadvantages of partnership business

. . .
* #

48 Business Entrepreneurship

Deed of Partnership Business

Partnership Business is formed with an agreement between two or more people. The
agreement can be oral, written. registered or unregistered.

A partnership business arise out of a need to overcome some of a sole proprietorship
business. Although the business has some similarities with a sole proprietorship,
partnership businesses have certain characteristics that distinguish a sole proprietorship
from a joint venture

As per statement from partnership act 1932 sectionS''Partnership relation is built from

agreement, not from social statuses.” Written agreement is called Partnership Deed.

Partnership deed is such evidence that describes the objective of the business,
operational guideline, position of cach partner, responsibilities, activities and
right and specific method to solve potential problem in future. The agreement is
to be signed by all the partners. This is to be kept in mind that business
conducted to make and distribute profit shall not be considered as partnership
business if there is no such agreement. If the children of a deceased person
become the heir and they operate the business and share the profit among them,
then it will not be a partnership business since there is no agreement with the
children.

Contents of the Deed of Partnership Business

Deed of agreement is treated as the guideline of partnership business. Various
important issues are incorporated in the deed to ayoid the contradiction among
partners and let alone complexities in operational procedure of the business.
Generally the following issues are stated in the deed of agreement:

1. Name and address of the partnership business.
Nature, objective and scope of business

Expiration or validity of the business

sae Ep

Name, address and profession of the partners,

Total capital of the firm

Capital to be paid by each pariner and payment method

Rules to run the business

Introduction of the partners who will directly run the business

Profit and Loss distribution method

. Responsibilities, power and rights of the partners

=~ Se eN Aw

—

. Name of the bank, Address and nature of account to be opened.

2025
Business Based on Ownership 49

12. Name of the partners to operate the Bank account

13. Guideline to include new partner and exclusion of existing partner.
14. Estimation, reservation and repayment method for share in case of death

of a partner
15. Retirement and dismissal process of partner

16. Solution method for future contradiction
17. Method of dissolution of partnership

Registration of partnership Business

Registration of partnership business refers to enlistment of the name of company
with the government appointed office of the registrar. Registration of
partnership business in Bangladesh is not mandatory as per Partnership Act of
1932. But the registered companies enjoy some additional benefits over the
unregistered partnership business. In a registered partnership business the
partner can sue against other partner for his rights as per partnership deed which
is not possible in case of an unregistered firm. Unregistered companies cannot
take any legal measures against any third party as well for the rights as in the
deed of agreement. On the other hand, if any third party sues any unregistered
partnership firm or against its partners, it cannot claim amy receivables against
the plaintiff only for being unregistered. Besides, unregistered partnership firm
cannot sue against any third party to claim taka more than hundred. So it is more
logical to register a parmership firm since it can enjoy the benefit of some
additional facility. The following things are to be attached with the application
for registration of a partnership business:

« Name of the partnership business

* Address of the head office

* Address of the branches (if any)

e Objective of the business

« Date of business commencement

« Expiry or validity of the business

* Partners name, address and profession

e Date of joining as a partner in the business
The registrar will check all the paper submitted along with the application
having been signed by all partners for registration. If the registrar is satisfied, he
will enlist the company and inform the company in written. The registration
process ends with receipt of the letter.

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-7
50

Business Entrepreneurship

Activity-4 : Write down the problems faced by unregistered partnership

business

1.

2
3,
4

Classification of Partners

‘The partners in a partnership firm can select their role in a business considering
the various conditions of the business, advantages and disadvantages, duties
and responsibilities. The concepts and characteristics of different types of
partners are mentioned below:

Different Types
of Partners

Concept & Characteristics

Ordinary Partner

Partners invest capital in the business and actively
participate in the operational activities of the business
Partners have unlimited liabilities

Equally share the profit and loss as per deed of agreement
Gets remuneration if mentioned in the agreement

Sleeping Partner

Partners invest capital into the business

« Share the profit as per avreement

Does not participate actively in the operational activities
of the firm having rights though.

Sleeping partner has unlimited Liabilities

Is not liable to any third party for the activities of the
business

Nominal Partner

Does not invest capital into the business

* Does not participate in the business operational activities
« Allows to use name/goodwill against profit sharing or in return

of particular amount of money as per deed of agreement.
Nominal Partners do not have unlimited liabilities like
the ordinary partners

But, if any body lends money considering him as a partner
and is able to prove it, then the partner shall be equally
liable like others.

20235
2025

Business Based on Ownership 31

Quasi Partner * ‘This type of partner does not withdraw the money invested
as capital and retains in the business as a loan

* In fact, this sort of partners are the creditors to the business

® Tf, any ordinary partner remains in the business in sucha
way without publishing notice, then he/she will be liable to
the third party for the activities of the business.

Limited Partner * If liability ofa partner is limited as per deed of agreement or
if any minor is taken as partner legitimately to facilitate him
with the consent of other partner he/she is called a limited partner.

® The liability of such partner ts limited to the amount of
invested capital,

« Does not take part in the business operation

e Any minor person can also be such partner on the basis
of deed of agreement.

Partner = by When any person introduces himself as the partner of a
Holding Out business verbally, written or in any other manner though
he is not a partner, he is called partner by holding out.

If, any body being influenced by his attitude; lends money
to the business, then such partner shall be liable.

Dissolution of Partnership Business

Partnership business is formed for a particular time period or to complete a
specific task. As per Partnership Act 1932, Section 39, dissolution of the
relationship among the partner is the dissolution of the partnership business.
According to the partnership act dissolution of the partnership business can be
done in many ways:

1. Dissolution by mutual consent: According to Section 40 of Partnership
Act, all the partners of the firm can mutually dissolve the business.

2. Forced Dissolution: According to Section 41 of Partnership Act, because

of the following two reasons forced dissolution can happen:
a) All but one or one of the partners become bankrupt or
b) If the business becomes anti legal or illegal for any reason.

3. Eventual Dissolution: According to Section 42 of Partnership Act,
dissolution can happen due to any of the following reasons mentioned in
the partnership agreement.

a) If specific time span of the business ends

b) If the specific task for which the business started is finished
c) In case of death of any partner

d) If any partner is declared bankrupt by the court
32 Business Entrepreneurship

4. Dissolution through Notice: Section 43 of the Partnership Act states
that Partnership business can be dissolved through the notice by any
partner of his desire to quit the business,

5. Dissolution by the Order form the Court: Section 44 of the Partnership
Act states that for any of the following reasons partnership firm can be
dissolved:

a) if any partner becomes insane,
b) Lf a partner becomes incapable forever,

c) If the trust and faith among the partners are affected by the misdeeds of
any partner:

d) If any partner transfers his share to any third party by violating the
terms and condition of the partnership deed.

e) If the business is incurring continuous loss and if it seems impossible to
run the business without incurring loss,

The court may order for dissolution of a partnership firm for other
logical reasons.

Concept of Joint Stock Companies

The institutional journey of business did not remain stipulated in this world
which started through formation of Sole Proprietorship business. Partnership
firm evolved to remove some limitations especially short of capital and single
operation, and smaller size of sole proprietorship business. But, the partnership
business could not free itself from the limitation of low capital, law, existence;
liability etc. In this way demand of customer and business scope increase rapidly.
As a result, on a legal basis company is formed with more capital and larger in
size which is called joint stock business or company or organization. In fact, the
changes in the production process because of industrial revolution brought vast
changes in the organizational nature and scope of business. Production and
distribution system placed itself in factory coming out from the periphery of
family boundary. As a result, Joint Stock Company was born with more capital,
limited Liability, joint management and legal entity and separate identity. It is
mentionable here that Industrial Revolution is the technological changes in
agriculture. factories, and coal mining and transportation system m Europe
during the mid eighteenth and nineteenth century.

£023
2025

Business Based on Ownership 53

Joint Stock Company is created and operated under the law. The first cornmpany
act was passed in Britain in 1844 which was known as "The Joint Stock
Company Act 1844", In the subcontinent of British ruled India first company act
was passed on 1850, In 1913, the Indian company act was again passed. In
independent Bangladesh the company act of 1913 was followed for long time.
The new company act in Bangladesh was introduced in 1994 with lots of
changes and corrections. At present in Bangladesh all the joint stock business is
rimming under the company act 1994. According to Company Act 1994,
company means-company formed and registered under the law or any existing
company. Actually, company is such an organization which is created under the
law, having separate legal existence, separate legal entity and limited liabilities
for the owner and where several people jointly invest money to carn profit.

Stream engines of James Watte :
Memorandum of Industrial Revolution

Features of Joint Stock Company

At present in the era of large scale business, the significance of this type of

business is inexplicable. This type of business possesses some features which

has given it separate status than all other type of business. The features of joint
stock company are described below:

1. Joint Stock Company is legally formed. This business is formed under the
prevailing law of the state. Since, it is formed legally; its formation is
complex and formal. Number of its member is limited by law. In case of
private limited company the number of members is minimum two and
maximum 50 and for public limited company the minimum number of
members is seven and the maximum is limited by the number of shares.
44

Business Entrepreneurship

Joint Stock Business is an enthusiastic organization. Several people will-
ingly come together to form and operate company business. Any member
can leave the business easily through transfer of his share. And any one can
become a member through buying its share,

Since, it is legally formed, it has legal personality. Legal personality means
enjoying legal status and rights like a person being a nonperson entity. Com-
pany independently can enter into contract, do transactions and can take
legal action ifnecessary. Other party also has the right to go to court against
the company.

Since, company is formed legally; its dissolution must be done under formal
legal system. In this way it owns the status of continued existence. The com-
pany does not dissolve with the death of any share holder. bankruptcy or
transfer of share.

. The company has to use a seal of its own name because it is a legal

personality. Use of this seal 1s mandatory for all the operations and papers
and documents of the company.

. The total capital of the company is divided legally into several small

portions. Each of the unit is called a share. Company accumulates capital by
selling the share. For this reason, it is called share capital. Any person aged
more than eighteen or any inslitulion can become a member by buying its
shares. Because of more member and the opportunities to collect capital by
selling share, it can arrange huge capital.

. Management is totally separate from the ownership in company business.

The owners of company business do not take part in the operational activi-
ties directly like the sole proprietorship firm or a partnership firm. Manage-
ment responsibility is mentained by another group of salaried people. The
directors or owners only take part in the policy level of works

The liability of the member of the company is limited. It is not unlimited like
the sole proprietorship business or partnership business. Member's liability
is limited by the share value or commitment. Limited by share means a
person shall be Liable for the amount of share he/she has purchased. For
example, if a person buys 100 share of Tk.100.00 each; in that case his
liability shall be limited to Tk. 10,000.00. On the other hand. limited by
commitment means the amount of share is committed to be purchased by a
person and he/she will be liable up to his/her commitment

2025
2025

Business Based on Ownership

33

9, In operation and management of company business, democratic culture and
values are followed. Share holders elect the board of directors through direct
vote and the business ts run by the decisions of the board of directors.

Activity-l: Find out the advantages and disadvantages of Joint Stock
| Companies after analyzing its features.

Advantages of Joint Stock Company

Disadvantages of Joint Stock Company.

Classification of Joint Stock Company

Various chanzes of the socio-economic condition of the world society and the
developmental touch influence the business world. As a result, large scale of
business in the form of joint stock companies evolved to surpass the limitations
of sole proprietorship and partnership business, Limited company is well known
among all the business of joint ownership. In Bangladesh, limited companies are
mainly divided into two categories: a) Private Limited Company: and b) Public

Limited Company

a) Private Limited Company

The company in which number of share holders are limited to minimum twa
and maximum fifty and where the shares are not easily transferable is called
Private Limited Company. In Company Act 1994 in Bangladesh states that,
"Private Limited company is one which, by its articles, restricts the right of
the members to transfer their shares, limits the number of its members to fifty,
prohibits any invitation to the public to subscribe for amy shares or
debenture of the company’ which means only the members can buy the shares.
The size of this type of limited company is usually smaller because of limited
members and capital. According to law, the minimum number of members
has to be at least two in this type of company. Gradually, the number of
private limited companies is increasing in Bangladesh.
56 Business Entrepreneurship

b) Public Limited Company

The company in which minimum nuraber of members is seven and maximum
is limited by the number of shares as mentioned in the memorandum of
association, can make invitation for subscription of shares and debentures,
and shares are easily transferable is called a Public Limited Company. Public
Limited Company can increase the number of members by increasing the
number of shares of the company by changing the memorandum of
association. As per law this type of company must have at least three
directors.

Activity-2 : Find five differences between Public Limited Company &

Private Limited Company

Private Limited Company Public Limited Company

Importance of Joint Stock Company

In today's business world, like the sole proprietorship business company joint
ownership company is also very popular. Besides, forming large size of business
it is possible to create employment opportunity for a larger group of people.
Employment does not only eliminate unemployment but also enhances the
standard of living and per capita income. More over, because of unlimited
liability in case of sole proprietorship and partnership business, large scale of
investment in risky venture is not possible which is possible in joint stock
companies. Besides. Joint stock companies are more suitable for high
technology based industry. Because, the large amount of capital required to set
up this type of business can be procured through selling shares to public
in the public limited company. As a result, involvement in the industrial
development of the country increases. Through Joint Stock Company, business
can expand internationally and relationship among the countries is strengthened.
At present many Multi National Companies (MNC's) are running their business
world wide. Bata Shoe Company, Unilver, etc. Multinational Companies are
working in our country. In this way, company of one country develops
relationship with another through opening their business branch in that country.
During the last two decades many Joint Stock Companies have been established
in Bangladesh which are contributing to the economic development of the
country and creating employment.

fi
|
=>
oy
Business Based on Ownership 57

Activity-3:

Make a list of Multi national Identify the importance of Joint

Companies working in Bangladesh Stock Companies for the socio-
economic development.

* *

. *

es *

. *

se e

Process of Formation of a Company

Companies in Bangladesh are formed following some sequential process under
the prevailing Company Act 1994, Formation of a company is done through four
continuous stages. These are:

a. Taking Initiative

At this stage, people interested to form the company come together to take
decision about the probable name of the company, type of the company,
amount of capital, ways to raise fund, address of the company etc. The
entrepreneurs fix the possible name of the company and take certificates
from the Registrar of Joint Stock Company.
b. Preparation of Documents
Al this stage, the entrepreneurs of the business prepare two important
documents for the business. One is called Memorandum of Association and
the other one is Memorandum of Articles. Memorandum of Association is
called the main document of limited company. It is also called the main deed,
certificate or constitution of the company. Various important issues like name
of the company, registered address, objective of business, amount of capital,
responsibilities of the share holders, mimimum subscription etc, are
incorporated in it. On the other hand, Memorandum of Articles incorporates
all the necessary internal operational procedures of the business.
c. Collection of Registration

At this stage, for registration of the company, application for registration is
collected by paying a certain amount of fees. The application form is
submitted having it filled up properly to the registrar of the Joint Stock
Company along with certain amount of fees and other necessary documents.

Busjness Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-&
58 Business Entrepreneurship

If the registrar is satisfied alter recetving the application, fee and all the
related documents then he enlists the company in the register book and gives
certificate of registration, Private Limited Company can commence its
business after receiving this document, but Public Limited Company has to
wait for the Business Commencement Certificate from the Registrar to
launch the business.

d. Business Commencement
To collect the business commencement certificate for launching business
operation of the public limited company, application to be made to the
registrar along with declaration of minimum subscription of capital by the
directors and Prospectus to issue share to the public with other important
documents. If all the documents are found correct and the registrar is
satisfied, then he provides business commencement certificate to the
company. Public limited company can commence business afler receiving
this document.
Activity-4
Prepare a presentation in group on the basis of collected data from inter-net
about the formation,visions.functions. profit, opportunities of empolyment
and social responsibilities of a multinational company,

Concept of Cooperative Society

The word ‘cooperative’ refers to work with combined initiative or effort.
Cooperative has evolved to proceed with the inspiration and belief of combined
effort. Because of Industrial Revolution and technology based large scale of
business, the base of capitalism increases, the more the economic discrimination
in the society is amplified. Lower and middle income group of professional and
businessmen start to face economic destitution. Cooperative society starts to
evolve in diflerent countries for emancipation from economic differences and
destitution created by capitalism. At first, Cooperative revolution started in
Western Europe, America and Japan. But, Rochdale Equitable Pioneers Society
established in 1844 at a place named Rochdale located at North England leads
the pioneer in establishing cooperative society. This is considered the first
cooperative society in the world formed by 28 weavers with 28 pound sterling of
capital. The members of this society were not financially solvent. They were
incapable to buy costly food and other necessities with their small wages. With
the help of cooperative they collected the regular necessities al a lower cost and
used to sell among the members.

20235
2025

Business Based on Ownership §9

Se : - ———

Rochdale

Pioneer Equitable Society First Cooperative organization of the world
Established [844

They had taken the policy of democratic mentality, trust and honor to each other
and honesty to operate this business. In this way the journey of cooperative
society starts.

In this subcontinent, government took initiative to form cooperative society in
1904. Kolkata Bengal Cooperative Society was established in 1918. The
campaign of cooperative society got huge popularity through establishing
Bangladesh Academy for Rural Development (BARD) at Cumilla by renowned
Civil Service Officer Dr. Akhter Hamid Khan in 1959. National Cooperative
Bank started operation in independent Bangladesh in 1972. Afterwards, various
types of cooperative society have been formed in our country. "Bangladesh Milk
Producers’ Cooperative Union Limited! which is known as "Milk Vita’ is another
mentionable cooperative society of the milk producers in Bangladesh. Besides,
many other cooperative society at national level are working in Bangladesh like
‘Fishermen Cooperative Society Limited’, ‘Bangladesh Auto Rickshaw Puller
Cooperative Federation Ltd.’ 'Cumilla Industrial Cooperative Society Ltd.'
‘Bangladesh Women Cooperative Society Limited’. According to the 2024 estimates
of the Directorate of cooperatives there are a total of 182,071 co-operative societies in
Bangladesh with a member of 9,56,1945. At present all the cooperative societies in
Bangladesh are operated onthe basis of Cooperative Act 2001 and Cooperative
Policy 2004. Cooperative business has been acknowledged as a popular business
organization in various developing and developed countries including Bangladesh.
60

Business Entrepreneurship

Sty facerene oer eget ar
fist DAY COVE

Hundred years of Cooperative in Bangladesh (1904-2004)

Characteristics of Cooperative Organization

Generally, several low and middle income group of people with similar
mentality willingly come together to form cooperative society to fulfill their
economic objective. They invest money equitably, operate the organization
democratically, and are agreed to justly bear the risk and share the advantages
and disadvantages of the business. Cooperative Society has some features which
are analyzed below:

1,

Generally, lower class and middle class people of similar mentality and
profession willingly forms this type of organization. The objective of the
society is to enhance the socio economic standard of the members in a
legitimate way. The main objective of this business is to gain self depen-
dency, not profit.

Cooperative Act 2001 has delineated three types of cooperative business:
these are

Primary Cooperative Society which shall have minimum 20 members and
objective is to enhance the socio-economic condition of the members in a
legal way. Maximum number of member is not specified.

Central Cooperative Society which will be formed with the 10 primary
cooperative societies with the objective to cooperate and coordinate the
activities of the member society.

National cooperative society which will be formed by comprising 10 central
cooperative societies with the objective to cooperate and coordinate the
activities of the member society all over the country.

£023
2025

Business Based on Ownership él

3.

Cooperative society is formed under cooperative society Act having a
nonperson and separate identity which has fixed continuous existence,
shall have the right to acquire, hold, transfer assets and ability to enter into
contract. The society shall have a seal and has the ability to sue and be
sued.

The total capital of the Cooperative Society is divided into small number
of shares. A person can be a member through buying a share, but, any
member can not buy more than one fifth of the total share of the
organization. Liabilities of the members are limited by the value of share.

Cooperative society is operated and managed by following democratic
rules and procedures. For all kinds of cooperative society, a member is
eligible to cast only one vote in decision making process of the society. To
cast the vote the member must be present because no proxy is allowed,

If the cooperative society is not registered or approved as per Cooperative
Act 2001, any person, club, organization or cooperative can not use the
word ‘Cooperative’ in its name. It means, without registration, using the
word ‘cooperative’ is prohibited.

Though cooperative has similarity with other types of business, it has some
different features as well.

Classification of Cooperative Society

Cooperative is in fact an organization of the poor middle and destitute group of
people in the society. But, at present people from various profession and class
with their own initialive or government assistance form different types of
cooperative society to be self-dependent economically and socially. However
cooperative Rules 2004 has stated the following profession based cooperative

societies:
1, Agriculture or Farmer’s Cooperative Society
2. Fisheries or Fishermen Cooperative Society
3. Labors’s Cooperative Society
4. Potter’s Cooperative Socicty
5. Weaver’s Cooperative Society
6, Cooperative Society of Landless People (Maximum land owned by

ff

the member is 40 decimal)
Poor Cooperative Society
Women Cooperative Society
62 Business Entrepreneurship

9. Cooperative Society of Auto Rickshaw Puller, Drivers of Auto
Tempo, Taxicab, Motor, Truck, Trunk Lorry, etc,

10. Hawker’s Cooperative Society

11. Transportation Owner or Labor Cooperative Society

12. Worker’s Cooperative Society

13. Milkmen Cooperative Society

14, Freedom Fighters Cooperative Society

15. Youth Cooperative Society (for the men and women aged from 18 to 35)

16, Housing Cooperative Society

17. Apartment or Flat Owners Cooperative Society

18. Shop Owners / Businessmen / Market Cooperative Society

The main objective of all the cooperative society is to develop the
socio-economic standard of its members. Though cooperative society evolwed
for the lower class, at present various people of different groups or profession
have the opportunity to form cooperative society. As a result, we can hope that
thousands of educated and semi-educated young people of the country shall be
motivated to establish cooperative society to be self employed and shall
significantly contribute to the economic development of the country.
Formation Process of Cooperative Society

Since, Cooperative Society is formed legally, society must be formed and

operated under a set of legal procedures. As per Cooperative Society Act 2001,
Cooperative Society is formed at the following three stages:

a) Initiation Stage: To form a Cooperative Society, at least twenty people
must come together from similar class, profession, status or similar
mentality. Among these originators, a management committee of six people
is formed. This committee outlines a by laws to form the Cooperative
Society with the registration. The By-Laws consists the name of the society,
address, objective, full description of capital, value of share and number,
method of selling share, initiators name, address and position, method of
operating the society, etc. A seal must be made for the cooperative society.
If the society has limited liabilities, the word “Ltd.” must be added at the
end of society’s name.

b) Registration Stage: At this stage, steps are taken for registration of the
society. For registration. Form-] is to be collected from the government

approved local authority and to be submitted having filled up properly along
with fees and three (3) copies of By-laws to the registrar. To form the

2025
2025

Business Based on Ownership 63

c)

Primary Cooperative Society by the Poor, Landless and Shelter less people
under the government Poverty Alleviation Program, a treasury challan of
Tk.300.00, for central Cooperative Society Tk.1000.00 and for National
Cooperative Society Tk.5000.00 should be submitted along with the
application form. Amount of share capital for registration of Cooperative
Society is fixed. For registration of Primary Cooperative Society formed
willingly to alleviate poverty or under government program paid up capital
of at least Tk.3,000.00, Other Primary cooperative society except Credit
Co-operative Society Tk.20,000.00, for registration of Credit Cooperative
Society paid up capital of at least Tk.100,00,000.00 and for central and
national cooperative society paid up capital of Tk.1,00,000.00 is required.
After scrutinizing all the documents and By-laws in details, the registrar
enlists the name of the society in his Registration Book and returns 2 (two)
copies of By-laws with registration number to the society. The registration
process is completed in this way.

Business Commencement Stage: After registration, the society gets legal
existence. Without registration no association can use the cooperative word.
Afier getting the registration, the originators of the society can start various
economic and social activities.

Activity-5 : Find out the similarities and dissimilarities among Sole
Proprietorship, Partnership, Joint Stock Company and Cooperative Society
Similarity Dissimilarity
* .
. .
* *
td] os

Basic Principles of Cooperative Society

Cooperative society is formed with a different ideology and objective than the
other business organization. Generally, people of same class. same profession.
belonging to the society of poor, middle or destitute primarily with the objective

to develop their own socio-economic condition and on the basis of some other
principles cooperative society is formed. The basic principles of cooperative are

described below:
64 Business Entrepreneurship

1, ‘The main principle of cooperative is the unity of the people of similar
mentality, profession and class based on economic condition. Actually,
the business was formed on the principle of unity is strength.

2. Another important principle of cooperative is equality or equal
participation of all the members. All the members are entitled of
similar honor irrespective of their economic, social, political and
religious status.

3. Another principle or ethics of cooperative is to cooperate among the
members. Member's cooperation and sympathy to each other
contributes significantly towards the development of the cooperative
society. It is the key to suecess of the cooperative society.

4, Trust and faith of each member on others is considered to be another
important principle of cooperative society, This makes them vigorous,
interested and confident.

5. Its democratic value and concept is another fundamental principle. All
the members of the cooperative society have the right to cast vote and
every member has a single vote. All the members have equal rights to
express opinion and cast vote irespective of their paid up capital or
amount of share in the society.

Problems and Prospects of Cooperative Society in Bangladesh

If we consider the socio-economic condition of our country, we shall find that
eighty percent of our population is engaged in agriculture and village based
various profession to earn a living like Farmer, Labour, Weaver. Fishermen,
Blacksmith, Potter and various types of small and cottage industries like
Bamboo and Cane, Pottery, Shell, Handicrafts, and various types of sole
proprietorship business such as groceries, tailor, Pharmacy, Vegetable shop,
Saloon, Tea stall etc. Although, most of them are from small and low income
group of the society, they are deprived [rom various social benefits such as
education, healthcare etc. It is not possible to overcome these difficulties solely.
On the other hand, the farmers and agriculture in this country could not
contribute to the fullest extent because of primitive cultivation method, shortage
of capital, quality fertilizer, scarcity of seeds and pesticides and small pieces of
land. They become victim of deceit from various inlermediaries because of
lack of unity, cooperation, trust among themselves. Cooperative Society is the
most suitable place for these type of different groups of small and low income

fi
|
=>
oy
Business Based on Ownership 65

farmers, labors and small traders for the development of their socio-economic
condition. They can also contribute for the economic development of the
country along with their socio-economic development by forming cooperative
society. Many cooperative socicties have been formed after the Independence
which has enabled those groups to develop their own condition as well as to the
development of the economy as a whole. But, this is not sufficient comparing
the society and country. Everybody, specially the young generation must be
encouraged to be engaged in cooperative society with the help of Government
assistance, suitable training and huge campaign on mass media.

How can you encourage the farmers) How will you encourage yourself to
of your locality to form cooperative form cooperative society after
society? completion of your studies?

Concept of the State Enterprise

Generally, companies formed, operated and controlled by the state are called
State Enterprise. This kind of business can be established by the state. For the
necessity of the state, business formed in other criterias can also be converted in
to state enterprise trough nationalization. Normally, state enterprises are
established to ensure industrialization, employment generation, controlling
money and banking system, proper uses and distribution of all the assets
including natural resources and public welfare in some specific sectors. Besides,
state enterprises are also formed and operated to control Arms Factories for the
safeguard and security of the nation. At present, in all the countries of the world
there are some state run business operated.

Characteristics of State Enterprise

State Enterprises have some unique characteristics. These are described below:

e State Enterprises are formed by the ordnance of the Head of State or
passing bill in the National Parliament. Besides, this type of business can
also be formed by nationalization by state ordnance.

« The ownership of the siate enterprises belongs to the state and the
government supplies all the required capital. But, in some cases partial
amount of share can be sold to the public. In that case, suppliers of
capital are government and public,

Business Entreprencurship. Class 9-10, Fonma-9
66 Business Entrepreneurship

© This type of business is formed under specific law and has legal and
separate entity. Because of legal entity and separate entity, state
enterprises have eternal existence.

* Like other business, the objective of state enterprises is not earning or
maximizing profit, public welfare or public service is its main objective.
® The profit of this business is deposited to the government treasury and
spent for the public welfare. The loss has to be born by the government.
* For the success or failure of state enterprises, the government is
accountable to the parliament.
Activity-7 : Analyzing the concept and characteristics, describe the necessity
of state enterprises

State Enterprises in Bangladesh

After getting independence on 16th of December, 1971, the new government
nationalized many personally owned factories. commercial, financial and
insurance business with a view to forming welfare oriented, equitable and fare
state, Besides. many state owned enterprises had also been established. There are
still a number of state enterprises in operation in the country though many of
them have been left for the personally owned business. A list of state enterprises
with the name, type and controlling ministry of the business are given below:

Bangladesh Bank.

20235
Business Based on Ownership

67

Name of the state enterprises

Type of Business

Controlling Ministry

Bangladesh Chemical Industries | Industry Industry
Corporation

Bangladesh Jute Mills Industry Industry
Corporation

Bangladesh Electricity Service Fuel & Mineral
Development Board

Bangladesh Bank Banking Finance
Bangladesh Road Transport Transport Communication
Corporation

Bangladesh Railway Transport Communication
Bangladesh Tourism Corporation| Service Aviation & Tourism
Bangladesh Biman Transport Aviation & Tourism
Bangladesh Inland Water | Transport Communication
Transport Corporation

Bangladesh Textile Mills | Industry Industry
Corporation

BangladeshTelephone Industries | Service Telecommunication
Corporation

Bangladesh Machine Tools | Industry Bangladesh Army
Factory, Gazipur

Bangladesh Television Service Information
Bangladesh Betar Service Information

Titas Gas Transmission & | Service Fuel and Mineral

Distribution Company Ltd.

Jiban Bima Corporation

Life Insurance

Finance

2025

Titas Gas Transmission & Distribution Company Ltd.
68 Business Entrepreneurship

EXERCISE

Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)

1. Which one is the most ancient and popular organization?
a. Parmership b. Sole Proprietorship
c. Cooperative d. Joint Stock Company

2. When the crisis of faith rises in partnership business?
a. Decision making is delayed b. Deed of agreement is not written
c- Profit is less d. Trust worthiness to each other is lost

Answer the question number 3 & 4 after reading the following paragraph

To change their lot, the poor women from Rasulpur formed a cooperative
society. They borrowed some money from a local NGO and started to make
handicrafts to sell in to the city. All their producis are damaged while one of their
members incurred accident at the time of carrying them to the city. As a result,
they faced huge loss, but, they remained together and their developmental work
continued:

3. What is the type of cooperative which is mentioned in the above para?
a. Poor b. Landless

c. Business d. Farming

4, What is the reason for the success of the cooperative —
1. Faith on each other
ii. Mentality of cooperation

iii. Democratic mentality

Which is one of the following is correct?
al & Il b. 1 & Ill
c. I & Il d. 1, & I

£023
2025

Business Based on Ownership 69

Creative Question

| Abir is the eldest son from a lower class family who lost his father when he
passed SSC.As a result, the burden of the family was imposed on him. This is
why his education came to end. In this circumstance, Abir opens a Tea stall at
Kaligonj Bus Stand to start his professional life by borrowing some money.

a, What is the main objective of sole proprietorship

b. Explain one point of difference between partnership and sole
proprietorship business.

ec. What will be the longevity of Abir’s business? Explain.

d. Considering the type of business organization, Abir’s business is less risky
but has unlimited liability, Give your opinion in light of the above para,

2. Naliz and his four other friends set up a food processing factory on the basis
of deed of agreement. The demand of their product is increasing day by day
because of the quality of their products. But, business expansion and
modernization 1s hampered due to shortage of fund. So, they changed the type of
their organization and started to work at a large scale in the name of Nafiz &
Friends Co. Ltd under Company Act 1994. Within two years they opened two
branches at divisional level.

a. How many types of business organizations are there’?

b. Ina sole proprietorship ‘Liability of the owner is unlimited’ Explain.

c. What was the type of Nafiz’s and his friends business at first stage?
Explain.

d. By changing the organizational form of Nafiz’s business shall contribute

to the economic development of the country. Evaluate the statement.
