2025

Chapter Eleven

Mineral Resources: Fossils

This Earth is about 4.54 billion years old. Many years ago, the appearance of this
earth was not the same as it looks now. 500 or 600 million years ago, this earth
was full of dense forests, low marshy lands and seas and oceans. Deceased
animals, plants, lichens and fungus destroyed by natural disasters were amassed
in the low-lying areas, which were later covered with silts. In this way, the
remnants of these plants and animals got covered with thousands of feet of soil
and layers of different kinds of rocks for millions of years. Extreme pressure,
high temperature and different kinds of physical changes for millions of years
resulted in the creation of coals, petroleum or natural gases which are called
fossil fuels. Carbon is the major component of coal while the main element of
petroleum is hydrocarbon, a compound made of carbon and hydrogen.
Hydrocarbon is an organic compound. The organic compounds like Alcohol,
Aldihyde, Kitone and Carboxylic Acid are mainly created from hydrocarbons.
This chapter will focus on these elements.
explain the concept of fossil fuels

explain petroleum asa mixture of organic compounds

explain the uses of petroleum

explain the variety and classification of hydrocarbons

explain the characteristics and reactions for preparing saturated and
unsaturated hydrocarbons and to differentiate between them
describe the chemical reaction of preparing plastic products and
synthetics and their uses

mention the bad impacts of misusing plastic products on
environment

explain the merits, demerits and usage method of natural gas,
petroleum and coal

explain the method of preparing alcohol, aldihyde and organic acid
from hydrocarbons

use alcohol, aldihyde and organic acid

carry out investigative work about the impacts of plastic products
on environment

distinguish between organic and inorganic compounds through
experiments

show awareness about the proper use of fossil fuels

2025
2025

Mineral Resources: Fossils 263

11.1 Fossil Fuel

The ruins of plants and animals of ancient periods which are found
underground are called fossil fuels. The remains of animals and plant-bodies
corresponding to hundreds of millions of years have been discovered as fossils.
Coals, natural gases and petroleum that we use as fuels are found as fossils under
the ground. That is why. coals, natural gases and petroleum are called fossil
fuels.

Hundreds of millions of years ago, there was a time when this world was full of
forests, low marshy lands and seas where aquatic plants, phytoplankton (a kind
of fungi living in water) and zooplankton (a kind of small creature living in
water) were available. These types of plants and animals went under the soil
because of massive natural disasters from time to time. They went more
underneath the ground with the passage of time and they started going deeper
into the soil gradually. As a result, pressure and temperature on them started to
increase. In the absence of air, they underwent decay and chemical changes.
Fossil fuels have been created from all types of tiny and gigantic plants and
animals because of heat, pressure and chemical changes for hundreds of millions
of years. Coals have been created from gigantic plants while petroleum has been
created from phytoplankton, zooplankton and bodies of deceased animals. As
this change goes on, petroleum turns into natural gas. So in some places both
petroleum and natural gases are found together. For instance, petroleum has
been traced along with natural gas in Haripur Gas Field of Bangladesh. As the
main source of this fossil fuel is animal body, the main elements of these fuels
are carbon and carbon compounds.

11.1.1 Natural Gas

The proportion of various components in natural gas generally varies based on

its natural source. The major component of natural gas is Methane (80%).

Moreover. Ethane (7%), Propane (6%), Butane and Isobutene (4%) and Pentane
(3%) are also available in natural gas. Bur the natural gas so far discovered in
Bangladesh contains 95-99% Methane.
264 Chemistry

11.1.2 Constituents of Petroleum and their Separation

Petroleum is generally available 5000 feet or even deeper into the layers of
rocks. Sometimes. petroleum is accompanied by natural gas which puts a
pressure on the upper surface of petroleum, When a well is dug, this natural gas
helps the petroleum to come out into the upper surface of the earth. The
Petroleum which is obtamed directly from the well is called Crude Oul or
Petroleum. This Crude Oil is opaque and sometimes has a bad smell because of
the presence of some compounds of Sulphur, This Petroleum is mainly a mixture
of different kinds of hydrocarbons and it is not directly useable, This Crude Oi
is separated through the Fractional Distillation process based on boiling points.

Fractional Distillation is also 20°C
a kind of distillation which
contains some long columns

Petroleum gas

for condensation of vapour.

Gasoline
Again these columns are Petrol)
divided into different parts Naplitha
and the lowest part has the
highest temperature. The Kerosene
higher the part is, the lower
the temperature is. As a Diesel oil
result, if the combination of —
more than one liquid is i,
inserted into the lower Fuel oil
portion of the Fractional
Distillation columns after
vaporisation through Bitumen
heating, the combination 340°C

will go to the upper part of Fig 11.01: Fractional Distillation of petroleum.

the columns. As the upper

parts have a lower temperature, each component of the combination of the liquid

is separated into different parts of the Fractional Distillation columns according +,
to the boiling points. Petroleum is a combination of different hydrocarbons and = &
Mineral Resources: Fossils 265

they have different boiling points. As stated earlier, crude oil is opaque but if it
is separated through fractional distillation, this crude oil will be split into
different parts like petrol, gas, petroleum, naphtha, kerosene, diesel, paraffin
wax and pitch etc which can be used for different purposes. Names of different
parts obtained from the fractional distillation columns, boiling points of different
parts, number of carbons available in the hydrocarbons of different parts and
their uses are described below:

(i) Petroleum Gas; The boiling point of this part is 0°C to 20°C. 1 to 4 carbons
are available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. Petroleum
contains 2% of petroleum gas which is liquefied after putting pressure on it and
then it is filled in cylinders. This gas named Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) is
used in producing heat for cooking and other purposes.

(ii) Petrol (Gasoline); The boiling point of this part is 21°C to 70°C. 5 to 10
carbons are available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. Petroleum
contains 5% of petrol which is also called gasoline. Gasoline is used as fuel in
vehicle engines.

(iii) Naphtha: The boiling point of this part is 71°C to 120°C. 7 to 14 carbons
are available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. Petroleum
contains 10% of naphtha. It is used as fuel and in producing different chemical
substances and other necessary products in petrochemical industries.

(iv) Kerosene: The boiling point of this part is 121°C to 170°C. 11 to 16 carbons
are available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. Petroleum
contains 13% of Kerosene which is used as fuel of jet engimes.

(v) Diesel: The boiling point of this part is 171°C to 270°C. 17 to 20 carbons are
available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. It is used as vehicle
fuel. lubricant and dissolvent.

(vi) Paraffin Wax: The boiling pomt of this part is 271°C to 340°C. 20 to 30
carbons are available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. It is used
in producing toiletries and Vaseline.

(vii) Pitch: The boiling point of this part is above 340°C. More than 30
carbons are available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. It is used
in road construction.

Forma-34, Chemistry Class-9-10
266 Chemistry

11.2 Hydrocarbons

Hydrocarbon is a compound contaming only carbon and hydrogen. Example:
Methane (CH,), Ethene (C,H,), Cyclohexane (C,H,,), Benzene (C,H,) etc. You
can see that the compounds have no molecule other than carbon and hydrogen.

Hydrocarbons are of mainly two types: (i) Aliphatic Hydrocarbon and
(ii) Aromatic Hydrocarbon

11.2.1 Aliphatic Hydrocarbons

The word ‘Aliphatic’ means something fatty, It is called Aliphatic Hydrocarbon
because this type of hydrocarbon is mainly obtained from animal fat.

Aliphatic Hydrocarbons are of two types — (1) Open Chain Hydrocarbon and (11)
Closed Chain Hydrocarbon,

(i) Open Chain Hydrocarbon

These hydrocarbons are called Open Chain Hydrocarbons because two terminal
carbons of their carbon chains remain in an open state. Example:

Butane: CH,-CIHL-CH,-CH,, Ethene: CH,=CH,

Again these Open Chain Hydrocarbons are of two types - Saturated and
Unsaturated.

(a) Saturated Open Chain Hydrocarbons: The Open Chain Hydrocarbon
which has only carbon-carbon single bond (C-C) is called Saturated Open Chain
Hydrocarbon, Example:

Propane: CT, -CH,- CH,, Pentane: CH,-CH,-CH,- CH,-CH,
(b) Unsaturated Open Chain Hydrocarbons: The Open Chain Hydrocarbon
which has one or more than one carbon-carbon double-bond or carbon-carbon

triple-bond is called Unsaturated Open Chain Hydrocarbon. Example: Ethyne
(CH=CH)

Unsaturated Open Chain Hydrocarbons may have carbon-carbon single bond
besides carbon double-bond or triple-bond.

20235
2025

Mineral Resources: Fossils 267

Based on double-bond or triple-bond, Unsaturated Open Chain Hydrocarbons
are again divided into two types- Alkene and Alkyne. In this chapter we will
learn about Alkene and Alkyne in details.

Carbon-Carbon double-bond is present in Alkene. Example: Propene (CH,-CH= CH,)

Carbon-Carbon triple-bond is present in Alkyne, Exaraple: Ethyne (CH=CH),
Propyne (H,C-C =CH)

(ii) Closed Chain Tlydrocarbons

In this type of Hydrocarbons, the terminal carbons of the carbon chain are
connected together and make a sphere or a circle. Chains of different sizes make
circles of different sizes. Like Open Chain Hydrocarbons, they may also be of
two types, namely Saturated and Unsaturated Closed Chain Hydrocarbons.

CH zo
Saturated Closed Chain Hydrocarbon; of s rt | Ma
CH —Cha Hy—CHp
Cyclopropane Cyclobutane
y i’ —CH;
‘al
Unsaturated Closed Chain Hydrocarbon: Fila H—CH,
Cyclopropene Cyclobutene

Closed Chain Hydrocarbons are sometimes called Alicyclic Hydrocarbons.
11.2.2 Aromatic Hydrocarbons

The word ‘Aromatic’ is taken from the Greek word Aroma which means scent or
fragrance. This was so named because the first aromatic compounds were
sweet-smelling. Benzene (C.H,) or Naphthalene (C,,H,) is the instance of
Aromatic Hydrocarbons.

The aromatic compounds are generally 5, 6 or 7 membered co-planer cyclic
compounds. It has alternative double bonds that means there is a carbon-carbon
single bond and a then carbon-carbon double bond.
268 Chemistry

H H i
| :
H C C H
Aig Pog oF Set Set Set
i ae:
= “ae
yoo “SH = See “er i
H H
Benzene Naphthalene
P

Fig 11.02: Aromatic compounds Benzene (C,H,) and Naphthalene (C,H,).
In this chapter our discussion will be limited to mainly aliphatic hydrocarbons.

Homologous Series: The compounds, which have close similarities in their
physical and chemical characteristics because of the same active radicals, belong
to the same class. These compounds constitute the Homologous Series. All
members of the same homologous series can be shown by a common formula.
For imstance, all compounds of the Alkane homologous series may be presented
by C_H,_,,- Examples of different homologous series are given below:

Table 11.01: Homologous Series.

Homologous General ;
Names and formulas of some initial members

Series Formula

Aikane | CEng / Methane (CH), Ethane (C,H,), Propane
| | (C,H). Butane (C,H,,)

Alkene | CyHon _ Ethene (C,H,), Propene (C,H,)

Alkyne | CaHan-2 | Ethyne (C,H,), Propyne (C,H,)

Alcohol | GyHmOH | Methanol (CH,-OH), Fthanol (C,H,OH)

Aldehyde CyHont CHO | Ethanal (CH,-CHO), Propanal (C,H,CHO)

Carboxylic | CaHmn+:COOH | Ethanoic Acid (CH,COOH), Propanoic Acid
Acid | | (CHeCOOH)

£023
2025

Mineral Resources: Fossils 269

11.3 Saturated Hydrocarbons: Alkanes

The hydrocarbons which have
carbon-carbon single bond in their
carbon chain are called Alkanes.
Common formula for alkanes is CH), _
(n = 1, 2, 3, 4,..). The name of the first LUZ
member of this group is Methane. As it
is the first member, its common formula
n= | and its formula is CH,. The name ©) & Gachousiom
of the second member (n = 2) is Ethane

and its formula is C,H,. It is very ® + Hydrogen atom
difficult to break the carbon-carbon and
carbon-hydrogen bond of alkane. That is
why, alkanes are chemically inactive to a great extent. For this reason, they

are called Paraffin which means lacking affinity. Alkanes generally participate
in chemical reactions only under high temperatures, high pressure, or in the
presence of a strong catalyst.

Methane molecule Bihane molecule

Fig 11.03: Methane and Ethane.

Naming of Alkanes:
Naming of Alkanes in the IUPAC system is as follows:

(1) In straight chain Alkanes, one-carbon Alkanes (CH,) are named as Methane,
two-carbon Alkanes (CH,-CH,) as Ethane,  three-carbon Alkanes
(CH,-CH,-CH,) as Propane and four-carbon Alkanes (CH,-CH,- CH,-CH,) as
Butane.

(ii) In alkanes, naming is completed by adding (ane) with the ending words
formula identifving the Greek number of their carbon number.

Alkyl Group

The single valance radical formed after removing one hydrogen atom from the
Alkane ts called an Alkyl Radical. As the common formula of Alkane is CH

2ot2?

we can write R-H instead of C_H,,_,, if we want to write it by using Alkyl Radical
R where R= CH, _,. Alkyl Radicals are named by omitting (ane) and adding
270

(yl) with the last part of the name of Alkane from which a hydrogen atom was
removed for formation of Alkyl Radicals. For instance. we can say Methyl
(CH,-) from Methane (CH,), Ethyl (CH,-CH,-) from Ethane (C,H,), Propyl
(CH,-CH,-CH,-) from Propane, Butyl (CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,-) from Butane,

Chemistry

Pentyl (CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,- CH,-) from Pentane, etc.

Table 11.01: Carbon numbers, names and formula of Alkanes.

eke Boma Formula of Alkane

of Alkane ATiCune
1 Methane CHy
2 Ethane CH;-CH;
3 Propane CH,-CH,-CHy
4 Butane CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,
5 Pentane CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,
6 Hexane CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,-CH;
7 Heptane CH;-CH3-CH,-CH,-CH--CH,-CH,
8 Octane CHs-CH,-CHz-CH,-CH;-CH,-CH -CH;
9 Nonane CH -CH,-CH3-CH,-CH;-CH -CH,-CH,-CH,
10 Decane CH,-CH5-CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,

2025
2025

Mineral Resources: Fossils Be Al

Preparation of Alkane
From carbon-di-oxide: Methane and water are produced when hydrogen is

heated with carbon-di-oxide at 250°C temperature in the presence of nickel
catalyst.

Ni
co, + 4H; ———* CH, + 2H;0
Carbon-di-oxide Hydrogen 250°C Methane Water

From Alkene and Alkyne: Ethane is produced when hydrogen is heated with
ethene and ethyne at 180°C- 200°C temperature in presence of nickel catalyst.

Ni
Chet, + = He —— — CCH;
Ethene Hydrogen igo°c-200°c —- Ethane
Ni
CH=CH + 2H, —_—__—_—_+ CH,-CH,
Ethyne Hydrogen 180° C-200° C Ethane

From Decarboxylation Reaction: Methane and sodium carbonate are produced
when sodium ethanoate is heated with sodium hydroxide in presence of calcium

oxide.
Cad
CH,COONa + NaOH —_ CH, + NaCO;
Sodium Sodium Methane Sodium
Ethanoate Hydroxide Carbonate

Properties of Alkane

Physical Properties: Melting point, boiling point and the physical condition of
Saturated hydrocarbons or alkane depends on the carbon number of alkanes. Its
physical condition changes with the change of carbon numbers. As the boiling
point of the saturated hydrocarbons with carbon number 1-4 is less than the
room temperature, they remain im gaseous state. Boiling point of saturated
hydrocarbons with carbon number 5-15 is greater than the normal room
temperature. So they remain in liquid state. Boiling point of 5-carbon saturated
hydrocarbon pentane is 36.1°C. Saturated hydrocarbons which have more than
carbon number 16 are solid.
373 Chemistry

Chemical Properties: As stated earlier, Alkanes are chemically inactive to a
great extent. So they do not react with acids, bases, oxidants or reductants.
However, they take part in some chemical reactions.

Reaction with Chlorine

Tetrachloro Methane is produced when Chlorine is mixed with Methane in the
presence of Ultra Violet (UV) light. This reaction is accomplished in four
phases.

CH, + ch — UW, CH.Cl + Hcl
Methane Chlorine Chloro Methane Hydrogen Chloride
cHcl + cd, — WW , CHCl, + HCl
Chloro Methane Chlorine Dichloro Methane Hydrogen Chloride
cHcl + ch —W i , CHCl, + He!
Dichloro Methane Chlorine Trichloro Methane Hydrogen Chloride
cHcl + cl — Uv , cc, + Hel
Trichloro Methane Chlorine Tetrachloro Methane Hydrogen
Chloride

Combustion Reaction with Oxygen: Methane reacts with oxygen of air and
thus carbon-di-oxide, water vapours and heat are produced. This heat is used in

cooking.
CH, + 20, le CO, + H,O + Heat
Methane Oxygen Carbon-di-oxide Water Heat

11.4 Unsaturated Hydrocarbons: Alkenes and Alkynes

Alkenes

The bio-compound which has at least one carbon-carbon double bond in its be
oy

carbon chain is called Alkene. General formula of Alkene is CA, Alkene is
Mineral Resources: Fossils 273

sometimes called Olifin (taken from Greek word Olefiant = oil forming) because
its lower members (Ethene, Porpene etc.) produces an oily substance in a
reaction with halogen (C1,, Br,).

Naming of alkenes

In TUPAC system alkenes are named by omitting (ane) and adding (ene) with the
names of Alkanes.

Alkane Alkene Formulas of Alkene

Ethane Ethene CH=CH,

Propane Propene CH3-CH=CH;
Preparation of Alkene

From Ethyl Chloride: Ethene, sodium chloride and water are produced when
water solution of sodium hydroxide is heated with Ethyl chloride.

CH,-CH,Cl +
Ethyl Chloride

NaOH ——> CH=CH, + Nacl + 4,0
Sodium Hydroxide Ethene Sodium Chloride Water

From Ethanol: Ethene and water are produced when deep sulphuric acid is
heated with Ethanol.

CH,-cH,oH 1:80 . cHyecH, + H,O
Ethanol Ethene Water
Chemical Properties of Alkene

Due to carbon-carbon double bonds in Alkenes, they are chemically very active.
Because one of the bonds is comparatively weaker though another one is
stronger, during reaction, the weak bond breaks and takes part m the addition
reaction,

Addition of hydrogen: Ethane is produced when Ethene is heated with
Hydrogen at 180-200°C temperature.

CH,=CH, +H; i =e. Gece,
Ethene Hydrogen 1g0-200°c Ethane

Forma-35, Chemistry Class-9-10
274 Chemistry

Addition of water: At high temperature and high pressure alkene reacts with
water vapours in the presence of phosphoric acid to produce alcohol.

high temperature and

CH,=cH, + H,o bighpressure » CH;-CH,OH
Ethene Water phosphoric acid Ethanol

Alcohol is used as an environment-friendly fuel and a solvent in petroleum
industries. So this reaction is very significant.

Addition of bromine; When a solution of red coloured bromine is added to
Ethene, Ethene reacts with the solution and produces dibromo ethane. In this
reaction the red colour of bromine disappears. All unsaturated hydrocarbons

show this reaction. This reaction proves that ethene is an unsaturated compound.

CH, = CHa + Bry -_ CHsBr-CHaBr
Ethane Bromine Dibromo eihane

Oxidization by Potassium Permanganate (Active or Nascent Oxygen):
Ethylene glycol is produced when pink coloured solution of potassium
permanganate and potassium hydroxide are added to ethene. In this reaction the
pink colour of potassium permanganate disappears. All unsaturated
hydrocarbons show this reaction. This reaction proves that ethene is an
unsaturated compound,

CH,=CH, +H,O + [o] —KMnQa, cH,0H-cH,0H
Ethane Water KOH Ethylene glycol

Polymerization of Ethene: Polythene is produced when ethene is heated at

1000 atm and 200°C temperature in the presence of a little amount of oxygen.

This reaction is called polymerization and in this reaction, Ethene is called
monomer,

1000 at
nCH, = CH, ssi . (-CH,-CH,)p

Ethene 200°C temperature, Polythene
a little amount of oxygen

20235
2025

Mineral Resources: Fossils 275
11.4.2 Alkynes

The bioe-compound which has at least one carbon-carbon triple bond (-C=C-) in
its carbon chain is called Alkyne. General formula of Alkynes is CH, ,.
Acetylene (CH=CH) is the smallest straight member of the Alkyne group.
Naming of alkynes

Alkynes are named by omitting (ane) and adding (yne) with the names of
Alkanes. For example, the name of CH=CH is Ethyne, CH,-C=CH is Porpyne,
CH,-C=C-CH, is Butyne-2.

Preparation of Alkyne

From Calcium Carbide: Ethyne and calctum hydroxide are produced when
water is added to calcium carbide.

CaCs - 2H,0 ———* CH=CH + CalOH),
Calcium Carbide Water Ethyne Calcium Hydroxide
Chemical Properties of Alkyne

Alkyne has carbon-carbon triple bonds. One of the bonds is strong while the
remaining two bonds are weak. The weak bonds of alkyne break up and take part
in the addition reaction.

Addition of Hydrogen: You have already learnt that Ethane is produced when
ethyne is heated with hydrogen at 180°C- 200°C temperature the in presence of
nickel catalyst. ;

CH=CH + 2H, __ Ni. cach,

Ethyne Tiydrogen 180-200°C = Ethane
Addition of bromine: When a solution of red coloured bromine is added to
Ethyne, Ethyne reacts with the solution and produces tetra-bromo ethane. In this
reaction the red colour of bromine disappears. This reaction proves that ethyne

is an unsaturated compound.

CH=CH +2Br, ——— CHBr,-CHBr,
Ethyne Bromine Tetra-bromo ethane.
276 Chemistry

Addition of water: Ethanal is produced when 20% sulfuric acid and 2%
mercuric sulphate are added to Ethyne at 80°C temperature.

La of
CH=CH +H,0 pon wae HgS0, CH,CHO
Ethyne Water 50°C Ethanal

11.5 Alcohols, Aldehydes and Fatty Acids

11.5.1 Alcohol

The bio-compounds which have hydroxyl radicals (-OH) are called Alcohols,
However, some compounds are not called Alcohol though they have hydroxyl
radicals (-ON). Such as- Phenol (C,J1,-Ol). General formula of alcohol is
CH,,,,OH. The first member of this class is Methanol (CI,-OH), second
member is Ethanol (CI,-CW,-OI). Alcohols can be symbolized by R-ON,
where R is the alkyl radical. The initial members of this class are colour-less
liquid substances and mix with water in all proportions.

Naming: Alcohols are named by omitting ‘e* and adding (ol) with the names of
Alkanes. Example: Ethanol (CH,CH,OH).
Preparation of Alcohol

From Ethyl Bromide: Ethanol and sodium bromide are produced when liquid

solution of sodium hydroxide is added with bromo ethane and heated.
CH,-CH,Br + NaOH —4 5 CH,CH,OH + NaBr

Bromo Ethane Sodium Hydroxide Ethanol Sodium Bromide
11.5.2 Aldehyde

The bio-compounds which have aldehyde group (-CHO) are called aldehyde.

Naming: Aldehydes are named by omitting ‘ce’ and adding (al) with the names
of alkanes. For example, propanal (CH,CH,CHO). The name of the first member
of this class is methanal (H-CHO).

£023
2025

Mineral Resources: Fossils 277

Preparation of Aldehyde

Addition of water: Ethanal is produced when solution of 20% sulfuric acid and
2% mercuric sulfate are added to Ethyne at 80°C temperature.

20% H,SO,, 2% HgSO
CH=CH +H,0 eee ee. CHS

Ethyne Water 80°C Ethanal

Fig 11.04: Diiferent dead bodies of animals preserved mm Formalin.

Formalin: 40% of the liquid solution of formaldehyde is called formalin.
Formalin contains 40% Methanol and 60% water. Formalin is widely used in
laboratories. It is used for preserving the dead bodies of different animals.

11.5.3 Organic acid or Fatty Acid

The compounds which have carboxylic group (-COOH) are called Organic acids
or Fatty Acids. General formula of fatty acid is CH, , COOH, It is symbolized
by R-COOH in short.

Naming: Fatty Acids are named by omitting ‘e’ and adding (oie acid) with the
names of Alkanes. Example: Ethanoic acid.
278 Chemistry

Preparation of Fatty Acids

From Ethanal: Ethanoic acid is produced when light sulfuric acid and
potassium dichromate are added with ethanal. (At first, potassium dichromate
reacts with sulfuric acid and produces nascent oxygen, which later reacts with
ethanal and produces ethanoic acid.)

K,Cr,0, + H,50,
CH,CHO + [0] ae CHy-COOH

Ethanal Nascent oxygen Ethanoic acid
Chemical Properties of Fatty Acids

Acidic Properties: All fatty acids are weak acids. Fatty acids are slightly
ionized in liquid solution. Aqueous solution of fatty acids turns the blue colour
litmus into red colour. Fatty acids produce salt and water in reactions with
base/alkali. For example, ethanoic acid reacts with liquid solution of sodium
hydroxide and produces sodium ethanoate salt and water.

CH,COOH + NaOH ——* __CH,COONa + HO
Ethanoic acid = =Sodium hydroxide Sodium ethanoate water

Vinegar: 4% to 10% aqueous solution of ethanoic acid 1s called vinegar. Vinegar
is used in making food and as food preservatives. As this solution is slightly
acidic, when it is used on food no bacteria can grow. As a result food does not rot.

11.5.4 Preparation of alcohol, aldehyde and organic acids from
hydrocarbons

‘You have learnt about different preparation processes of alcohol, aldehyde and
organic acids. The main constituent of petroleum is hydrocarbon (alkane, alkene
and alkyne) and alcohol, aldehyde and organic acids can also be prepared from
this hydrocarbon.

(i) Saturated hydrocarbon or alkane reacts with halogen and in presence of
sunlight and produces alkyl halide. You have already learnt how chlorine reacts with
methane in the presence of ultraviolet rays from sunlight. Alkene reacts with hydrogen
bromide in presence of hydrogen peroxide and produces allcyl bromide. In reaction

with the aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide, alkylhalide turns into alcohol. When 3
ey
2025

Mineral Resources: Fossils 279

this alcohol is oxidised by a strong oxidant (K,Cr,O, and 1H,SO,), at first
aldehyde/ ketone is produced and later it turns into organic acid.

(ii) Alkene reacts with water vapour (H,O) at 300°C temperature and 60
atmosphere pressure in the presence of phosphoric acid to produce alcohol.
Alkyne (ethyne) reacts with water in the presence of 2% mercuric sulphate
(HgSO,) and 20% sulphuric acid (H,SO,) and produces aldehyde. However, due
to the toxicity of HgSO,, its use is discouraged in industries, Organic acid is
produced when the alkane obtained from petroleum is oxidized by the oxygen of
air at high temperature and pressure.

11.6 The Uses of Alcohol, Aldehydes and Organic Acids

Alcohol: Methanol is a toxic chemical substance. Methanol is mainly used in the
preparation of other chemical substances. In chemical industries ethanoic acid
and aster of different organic acids are produced. Ethanol is mainly used as a
solvent in perfume, cosmetics and pharmaceutical industries. Pharmaceutical
eraded ethanol is used in pharmaceutical industries and rectified spirit is used in
homeopathic medicine. 96% liquid solution of ethanol is known as rectified
spirit. Ethanol is widely used in perfume industry. Ethanol is made free from
odour before using in perfume. Except pharmaceuticals and food industries,
rectified spirit before using in other industries is mixed with little amounts of
methanol to make it toxic. This is called methylated spirit. Ii is used to burnish
wood and metallic fumiture. Now in Brazil ethanol is used in motor engine as
fuel instead of fossil fuel.

Alcohol can be prepared from starch (rice, wheat, potato and corn) by
fermentation. Besides, ethanol can be obtained in the same way from the
molasses (by-product of sugar).

Keru & Co at Darshona in Bangladesh produces ethanol and meets the demands
of the country. If we use ethanol as fuel, the demand on fossil fuel will be
decreased and on the other hand environment can be kept pollution free.
280 Chemistry

Aldehydes: Different kinds of plastic materials are made from aldehyde by the
polymerization reaction. Delrin polymer is produced when liquid solution of
methanol is heated at a very low pressure. Delrin is used to make chairs, dining
tables, buckets etc.

Condensation polymerization reaction of formaldehyde and urea produces
Urea-formaldehyde resin which is used to prepare household appliances like
plates, drinking water pots, mugs etc.

Organic acids: Organic acids are weaker than inorganic acids. Organic acids are
edible constituents. We take organic acids as food with lemon juice (citric acid),
tamarind (tartaric acid), curd (lactic acid). Having the capability of destroying
bacteria, organic acids are used as food preservative. 4% to 10% liquid solution
of ethanoic acid is known as vinegar. Vinegar is used to preserve sauce and
pickles.

11.7 Polymers

The reaction in which innumerable tiny molecules of any substances are
attached with each other and form a large molecule is called a polymerization
reaction, Each of the tiny molecules which take part in the polymerization
reaction is called a monomer and the large molecule formed because of the
reaction is called a polymer molecule. When two monomers join each other, it is
called a dimer, when three monomers join one another, it is called a trimer. In
this way when many monomers join one another, then polymer is formed. The
main element of our food is protein, which is also a polymer of amino acid.

Polymers can be classified in many ways. However, according to their structure,
polymers are of two kinds, such as Addition Polymer and Condensation
Polymer,

11.7.1 Addition Polymers

The polymerization reaction in which the monomer molecules are directly
connected to one another and form a long-chained polymer is called an addition
polymerization reaction. The polymer which is formed in an addition
polymerization reaction is called an addition polymer.

i
|
=>
oy
Mineral Resources: Fossils 281

Addition Polymerization Reactions: Polythene is produced when ethene is
heated in the presence of a little amount of oxygen at 1000 atmosphere pressure
and 200°C temperature. This reaction is called Addition Polymerization
Reaction. In this reaction, ethene is called monomer.
1000 atm pressure
nCH, = CH, 5 (-CH2-CHy)n

Ethene 200°C temperature, Polythene
little amount of oxygen

Polypropene: Polypropene is produced when propene is heated in the presence
of titanium chloride at 140atm pressure and 120°C temperature.

140 atra pressure

nCH,=CH(CH,) iS [-CH,-CH(CH,)-],
Propene 120°C, titanium Polypropene
chloride

Polypropene is stronger and thicker than polythene and can withstand high heat.
Ropes, pipes, carpets etc.can be made of Polypropene.

Polyvinyl Chloride or PVC: Polyvinyl Chloride or PVC is produced when
vinyl chloride is heated at high pressure and high tensperature in the presence of
organic peroxide. This polymer is widely used for manufacturing various types
of pipes, wires, and even medical devices.

high pressure, high temperarure

nCH, = CHCl -(CHy-CHC))-,
Vinyl chloride Organic peroxide Polyvinyl Chloride

11.7.2 Condensation Polymers

The polymerization reaction in which the monomer molecules release small
molecules such as H,O. CO, ete during their joining one another is called
the condensation polymerization reaction, Nylon 6:6 polymer is produced in the
condensation polymerization reaction,

Production of Nylon 6:6: Nylon 6:6 is produced when adipic acid is heated
with hexamethelene di-amene in the presence of titanium oxide.

nHOOC-(CH,),-COOH + nNH,-(CH,)-NH, ——lHO2

Adipic acid Hexamethelene di-aniine A
(-OC-(CH,),-CONH-(CH,),-NH-), = + 2nH,0
Nylon 6:6 Water

Forma -36, Chemistry Class-9-10
282 Chemistry

Based on the sources, Polymers can be further divided into two: Natural
Polymer and Synthetic Polymer or Plastic.

Natural Polymers

Many polymers are produced naturally, such as cellulose and starch in plants.
Both of them are natural polymers which are formed from many glucose
molecules.

Protein is a polymer of amino acid. Astringent juice of rubber trees is a natural
polymer. Rubber is cultivated in the Hill tracks, Cox’s bazaar, Hobigonj, Sylhet
and Tangail districts of our country. In industries plastic is being synthesized
several times more than natural rubber.

Table 11.03: Different Polimers, Properties and Uses.

Nameofthe | Formula Properties of Uses
polymer of monomer polymer
Polyethylene CH=CH, Cannot be cut | P lastic bag,
easily, durable plastic sheet
Polypropene | CH;-CH-CH; Cannot be cut | Plastic rope.
easily, durable plastic bottle
Polyvinyl =| CHj=CHC! Hard , solid and léss_| Water pipe,
chloride(PVC) flexible than electric
polyethylene insulator
Nylon 6:6 HOOC-(CH,),-COOH Glittering, durable, Artificial
8 flexible cloths, rope,
H,N-(CH;),-NH; tooth brush

Synthetic polymer or plastic

Plastic is hard, light, cheap and available in any colour. Plastic can be melted
and be given any shape by molding. The word plastic has come from the Greek
word ‘Plastikos’ which means possible to melt. Many of us make various
materials by melting rejected plastic parts. It is dangerous because burning or
melting of plastic products by heating produces many toxic gases. Plastic is
widely used to produce various products like pots for keeping foods, packets,
ballpens, chairs, tables, motor parts, water tanks, bowls, buckets, mugs etc.

20235
2025

Mineral Resources: Fossils 283

11.7.3 Advantages and disadvantages of using plastic

In the present world. synthetic polymers like plastic are widely used. The uses of
these type of products has many advantages. On the other hand, plastic products
are a threat to our environment. These type of products have become a part and
parcel of our daily life. That is why we cannot keep away from these products.
We can overcome these disadvantages to some extent if we can use them in a
proper way.

Advantages: Our daily necessary materials like utensils, different kinds of
pipes, containers, and bags are made from plastic materials. Earlier, metals,
natural fibers like cotton, jute, wood were used to make these products. Plastic
is thicker than these. We can make materials of different sizes by shaping plastic
as we wish and we can make them attractive by using colours on them.

Disadvantages: The greatest disadvantage of using plastic is that it is harmful
for the environment. The things which we dump im soil or water decompose by
reacting with bacteria or oxygen of the atmosphere or other substances in water
or soil and they maintain the balance of the environment, But plastic products
are neither decomposed by bacteria nor react with other substances. That is why
they remain the same when they are dumped on soil or water. As a result they
pollute the soil or water and spoil the balance of the environment.

Our responsibilities: We should not dump plastic products indiscriminately;
rather we should preserve them for reuse by recycling. On the other hand, we
should increase the use of wood, metal, natural fibre. Scientists are trying to
invent decomposable plastic products and they have already become successful
in many cases. So it is hoped that decomposable plastic products will be
available in the markets instead of existing plastic products, in near future.

11.7.4 Differences between organic compounds and inorganic
compounds

The compounds which you have studied in this chapter are all organic
compounds. Organic compounds are generally formed by covalent bonding and
inorganic compounds are formed by ionic bonding.
284

Chemistry

Organic compounds

Tnorganic compounds

1. Generally, organic compounds
must have carbon. Example:
Methane (CH,)

1. Except some exceptions, generally
inorganic compounds have no carbon.
Example: Hydrogen Sulphide (H,S)

2. Usually, organic compounds take
along time to react. )

2. Usually, inorganic compounds take
lesser time to react.

3. Organic compounds are generally
formed by covalent bonding.

3. Inorganic compounds are usually
formed by ionic or covalent bonding.

-

=

~

Activity: Define organic compounds. Taking some organic and inorganic
compounds determine their melting points and show the differences.

Think: How to differentiate between organic and inorganic compounds on
the basis of deference of ionic and covalent compounds.

£023
2025

Mineral Resources: Fossils 285

1. What is the percentage of ethane in natural gas?
a. 3% b. 4%

c. 6% d. 7%

2. Which of the following compounds can cause the disappearance of red colour
of bromine?

a. CH, b. C,H,O
0. C,H,O d. C\H,
Reaction: cy. c=cu Br, x Bry Y

Answer the questions 3 and 4 from the above reaction:

3. What is the name of compound Y?
a. L,l-di bromopropane b. 2,2-di bromepropane
c. 1,1,2,2-tetrabromopropane — d.. 1,2-dibromoprapene.

4. In the stem X compound -
i) gives an addition reaction
li) is used to produce plastic

ii) is less reactive than Y

Which one of the followings is correct?
a. i and ii b. ii and iiti
c. i and iii d. iii and iii
286 Chemistry

1. In the months of March—June huge amount of potato rots in Bangladesh due
to lack of preservation. Ethanol can be prepared from the potato by the following

reaction.

enzyme (zymage)

Enzyme (diastage and maltoze)
Starch » Glucose >» Ethanol

Water
a. What is the main constituent of petroleum?

b. Why are alkenes more reactive than alkanes? Explain.
c. Give a description of the preparation of methane trom potato.

d. Analysis of the possibilities of using excess potato as an alternate to fossil

fuel.
2.A gas is converted to different products by the reactions i to ili successively.

(ii) HC=CH + HCl » CH,-CHCl
ss Polymerization
(iti) nCH,=CHCcl + -(CH,-CHCI)-,

a. What is a hydrocarbon?

b. Why is benzene an aromatic hydrocarbon?

c. What type of reaction is number i ? Explain

d, Analyze the possibilities of diversification of uses of the first reactant gas
in the stem.

x + NaOH ——+ CH,COONa + H,0
Sodium hydroxide Sodium ethanoate water
a. What is an aromatic hydrocarbon?
b. How is ethyne prepared from calcium carbide? Write with the reaction
c. Complete the reaction in the stem.
d. Is the X compound an acid? Analyze.

2025
