2025

Chapter Ten
Co-ordination

We know that, various physiological actions and reactions are happening within
the body. These activities happen all together. Co-ordination of these activities is

necessary because if there is a lack of co-ordination, then abnormalities occur. In
plants there is co-ordination to perform all physiological processes, such as:
reproduction, metabolism, dormancy, germination, growth, movement, etc.

The human body performs different activities with the co-ordination such as:

brain and hormones, The co-ordination of plants and human are discussed in this
chapter.
s chapter, we will be able to-

explain the co-ordination system in plants:

explain the co-ordination system in animals;

explain the functions of the different parts of the nervous system:
explain the structure and functions of a neuron;

explain reflex actions;

explain emotional transmission;

explain the main functions of hormones;

describe irregular secretion of hormones that creates physical problems;
describe the causes and symptoms of stroke;

describe instant measures to be taken against stroke and its treatment;
describe nervous disorders’ symptoms, causes, and remedies:

analyse the effects of tobacco and drugs in coordinating activities;
investigate the cause of physical disorders regarding hormones;

raise awareness regarding the harmful elfects of drugs or addiction;
draw a leaflet or poster regarding the harmful effects of drugs or addiction;

be aware of the harmful effects of tobacco and drugs on the nervous system.

225
10.1 Coordination in Plants

Like animal different physiological activities are simultaneously and
continuously carried out in a plant cell. These activities are accomplished
through some systems and methods. The coordination of physiological activities
is an essential act. If there is no coordination in plant life, many abnormalities
will arise.

In the life span of a plant the stages in the life cycle, such as germination, growth
and development. flowering, the development of fruit, aging, dormancy etc.
follow a set of systematic rules. The significance of weather and climatic factors
on these processes is also notable.

With the growth and movement, the different physiological activities in plants
are complex and ceaseless. Despite this, these activities are accomplished
following special regulations and systems. One activity does not interrupt
another in any way. Through the evolution of lac-crore years such type of
delicate coordination has earned.

10.1.1 Phytohormone

The biochemical substance which is produced in the plant body and regulates
growth and development of the plant and the formation of different organ is
called a hormone. Plant hormone is called phytohormone. Some describe
phytohormones as plant growth substances. According to the most scientists,
any chemical substance, being produced m cells and translocated to other distant
cells, and controls their activities and the substances are called hormones. Every
cell of a plant has the ability te produce hormones. The main natural
phytohormones are auxin, gibberellin, cytokinin, abscisic acid, and ethylene.
The hormones, which are usually found in plant, are auxin, gibberellin,
cytokinin and abscisic acid. Hormones are not plant nutrients but it regulates the
activities of the plant.

Other than the hormones mentioned above, there are some other hormones
which could not be separated or identified. They are called postulated hormones.
They mainly help activities related to the development of flowers and
reproductive organs. Florigen and Vernalin are the main hormones of this type.
It is presumed that florigen is formed in the leaves and, bemg translocated to the
base of the petiole, transforms the vegetative buds into floral buds. So,
florigen helps a plant in its flowering.

Forma-26, Biology Class-9-10
The main phytochormones are mentioned below:

(a) Auxin: Charles Darwin first discovered this phytohormone, and later Kogl
and Haagen Snit called it auxin. Charles Darwin studied the effect of light on the
coleoptiles of plants. When the light shines on one side of coleoptiles. it tums
towards the source of light. but in darkness it grows erectly. By performing
experiments, scientists found that a chemical substance at the top of the
coleoptiles is responsible for that type of movernent. This substance is auxin. After
the application of auxin, roots grow from grafted buds, preventing the premature
shedding of fruits. In plant cells the movement of auxin happens downwards. The

rate of osmosis and respiration is increased due to auxin. It also plays a role in
producing fruits without seeds. Auxin is not just a hormone, it is a common

name or class of phytohormone, all of which are involved in somehow
controlling the growth of the plant. For example, indole acetic acid (IAA),
indole butyric acid (IBA), naphthaleneacetic acid (NAA) ete.

(b) Gibberellin: The causal organism of Bakanae disease of rice is a kind of
fungus, which causes an over growth of the rice plant. An organic substance can
be extracted from it, due to which the overgrowth of rice plant occurs. This
substance is gibberellin. Most of the gibberellins are found in mature seeds but
they are also traced in seedlings, cotyledons and meristematic regions of the
leaves. Elongation of the internodes are influenced by the phytohormone. So, the
plants grow excessively in length. If this hormone is applied to a stunted plant,
it grows more in length than a normal plant would. It plays a role in blooming
flowers and in shortening the period of dormancy in seeds and in germination.
(c) Cytokinin : Cytokinin is found in fruits, cereals and the water of green
coconuts, It is also found in the roots of some plants. This generally stimulate the
process of cell division, mixed in different level of concentrations with Auxin.
The hormone also plays a role in the growth of cells, the development of organ
or plant parts, breaking the dormancy of seeds and organs, and in delaying the
aging process. During the cell division cytokinesis occurs in a cell because of
the effect of cytokinin.

(d) Ethylene: This hormone is a gaseous substance. It helps the fruit to ripen. It
is also found in fruits, flowers, seeds, leaves and roots. Ethylene breaks
dormancy in seeds and buds. It also plavs a role in the growth of seedlings by

2025
£23

stems growth and triggers the initiation of growing flowers and fruits. Ethylene
accelerates the shedding of leaf. flower and fruit. It is also used to ripen fruit
artificially.

Uses of hormones: Auxin and other hormones help in growing roots in graft
tissue. A kind of auxin named indole acetic acid improves the effectiveness of
cambium. As a result, uncontrolled cell clusters are developed and the injuries
are healed up. By applying auxin, the shedding of fruits is delayed. Auxin and
gibberellin are also used in producing fruits without seeds,

Growth

The effect of light and temperature on the development of different organs of the
plant is remarkable. Through different synthesizing methods, the formation of
distinct elements causes the development of new organs. Probably in the
presence of light, the hormone auxin becomes inactive and so, in the dark
(absence of light), the concentration of auxin increases. Some scientists believe
that auxin in lighted part moves to the dark region and there growth occurs at a
higher rate. The growth of lighted part, being inhibited, turns more towards light.
The tip of the plumule or radicle can feel the stimulus of gravitation. This is
called geoperception. Owing to gravitation, the components of the cell are
translocated downwards. They cause a pressure on the wall of cell laterally. This
is why gravitational movement is accomplished.

The flowering of most plants depends on photoperiod. For example, the
Chrysanthemum is a short day plant. Long day light causes inhibition to their
flowering. The rhythm of the light and dark periods in a plant is an example of a
biological clock.

On the basis of the rhythm of light and dark in plants, plants are divided into
three categories :

(a) Short Day Plant: Average daily photoperiod of 8-12 hours is required for
flowering. For example, Garland chrysanthemum and Dahlia.

(b) Long Day Plant: Average daily photoperiod of 12-16 hours ts required for
flowering. For example, Lettuce and Ridge Gourd (Jhinga).

(c) Day Neutral Plant: Photoperiod has no role on flowering. For example,
Garden Cucumber and Sunflower.
Like light, heat and cold also play a role in the growth of plant and flowering in
them. If cold is applied to the germinating seeds of many plants, their flowering
period gets advanced. The acceleration of flowering of plants by applying cold
is called vernalization. Scientists have proven temperature effects the flowering
of planis. Flowering is prolonged if the wheat of winter is cultivated in summer.
If 2°-5° C temperature is applied on the seeds after sowing, normal flowering
oceurs in them. So, you can see that the stimulant like light, gravitation, heat
effects the growth of plant.

In this way, plants develop the coordination in their physiological activities.

Movement

Like other living organisms, plants are able to perceive stimuli. This is why the
reflex made by external and internal stimuli cause movement in plants. Some
movements in plants happen because of growth and other movements occur in
plants because of internal and external stimuli. Movement always occurs due to
some factors.

Movements in plants can be categorized
into two: movement of locomotion and
movement of curvature. When any part
of a plant holistically moves from one
place to another it is called movement of
locomotion. For example, this type of
movement ts found in the gametes and
zoospores of some fungi and higher
plants. It is also found in some bacteria
and algae, for example, Folvox,

Chlamydomonas and diatoms. Figure: 10.01:Response of plant towards
light.

Higher plants anchored in soil cannot move from one place to another. But they
can move and curve their organs or parts of organ to some extent. This type of
movement is called movement of curvature.

Movement of the stem towards light, movement of the root towards dark and
twining of tendril around suitable host are the examples of movement of

2025
2025

curvature, Movement of locomotion and movement of curvature are of many
iypes. Among them phototraphic movement is notable.

Phototrophic movement or phototropism

Phototrophic movement is a kind of movement of curvature. The stem and
branches of a plant always move towards light and the root always moves away
from light. The movement of the stem towards light is called positive
phototropism and the movement of root away from the light is called negative
phototropism.

W) Individual Activity

Activity : Observe a plant for a week keeping it by the side of a window
of your classroom and present the results obtained, with reasons.

@) Individual Activity

Activity : Test the movement of germinated chickpea root towards gravity |
and present the results with reasons.

10.2 Co-ordination in animals

Influence of Hormones : Necessary co-ordination in animals is done by nerves
and hormones. An animal's activities (movement, or behavioral change) occurs
due to hormones. Hormones are secreted from different ductless glands, which
control each other. The activities of hormones are controlled by the nervous
system. Activities of hormone can be considered to be workers. As a whole
which worker works, where, and how long he will work are all controlled by the
manager. Like this, the nervous system controls the activities of the hormones.
The hormones have a long term effect on the function and development of the
nervous system.
At first there was an idea that a hormone is a stimulating substance. But later it
was found that all hormones are not stimulating in function, some are inhibitors.
A very small amount of hormones is required to control particular physiological
functions. As a stimulator or inhibitor hormones control growth, development
and functions of various tissues. The influence of hormones on an individual's
behaviors, nature, and emotional impulse is very important. Hormones are
carried by the blood from the place of origin to distant places where they
stimulate certain cells or organs to respond, So they are often called chemical
messengers.

Animals use hormones for co-ordination, If an ant gets a trace of food, it secretes
a hormone from the source to its destination known as a pheromone. Other ants
go to the source of food by following the path of this pheromone. After eating all
the food ants stop secreting the pheromone, and so influence the other ants not
to go there again. Some insects secrete pheromones in the air even from 2-4
kilometer distance. Humans make use of pheromones to destroy harmful insects.
This process is very environment friendly to control harmful insects,

Influence of nerves : Different organs take part in different activities, such as :
walking, sitting, talking, thinking. laughing, crying etc. To regulate these organs,
coordination and integration are necessary. The nervous system and hormones
together direct. control and co-ordimate all those activities. The system,
through which the animal responds to stimuli, maintains connections of various
organs, co-ordinates activities, and physiological processes and maintains
relations with the environment, is called the nervous system. To perform
different activities our body needs the co-ordination of millions of cells.
The nervous system plays an important role in coordinating the different
activities of a body.

All the activities of the body are performed by receiving stimuli from the
environment and producing responses. The outside of the body is the
external environment and the inner side is the internal environment. Stimulus
from the external environment is sound, sight, taste and touch, These create
stimulation at sensory nerves of the ear, nose, eye, tongue and skin.
Internal stimulants are heat, pressure and various chemical substances. Some

2023
2025

nerve impulses originate inside the central nervous system. This two types of
stimuli can create stimulation to the sensory and motor nerves. Impulses which
pass along sensory neuron fibers to the brain. The brain receives impulses from
the sensory organs and then sends impulses through the motor nerves to the
glands and muscles, causing them to function accordingly.

10.3 Nervous system

Nervous system: The nervous system coordinates with different organs and
systems, carries impulses to different parts of the body, and maintains a relation
with the environment by responding to stimuli.

The nervous system:
system
system
(Brain (Spinal cord) | Cranial-spinal nau |
( nerves ) \ system

: j a etl P athelic
“cari | Soe] tans) mao

"

Central nervous
system

10.3.1 Central Nervous System
Central nervous system consists of the brain and the spinal cord. The brain is
protected by the skull.

Brain: The swollen part of the nervous system, at the top of the spinal cord and
inside the slcull, is called the brain. The brain is the director of the nervous
system. The brain is divided into three parts: a) Fore brain b) Mid brain and
¢) Hind brain.
a) Fore brain or Prosencephalon : The largest part of the brain is the cerebrum,
which consists of two completely divided lobes, the right and the left. They are
separated by deep furrows. These are the cerebral hemispheres. Though there is
a deep furrow between two lobes, they are still connected by a bunch of nerves
named the corpus callosum. The right hemisphere controls the left side of the
body and the left hemisphere controls the right side of the body. This part of the
brain has a folded and wrinkled surface. It is covered by a membrane called
maninges. The left lobe of the cerebrum is comparatively well developed. The
cerebrum is also called the fore brain. The exterior surface of the cerebrum is
named the cortex and is composed of numerous neurons and is gray in colour.
So, the other name of the cortex is grey matter. The deeper layer of the cerebrum
consists of axons of neurons which is covered by white coloured mayaline. So
the white matter is situated in the depth of the cerebral cortex.

Cerebrum is the higher organ which receives nerve impulses and sends
responses (nerve impulse) to the various organs of the body, Cerebrum is the
centre for body movement i.e., for every activity and sensation. Conscious
activities, e.g. speech, vision, hearing, intelligence, memory, thinking, will and
activities of voluntary muscles are controlled by the cerebrum. It also helps in
taking decisions and in responding to stimulation. Among all the animals the
evolution of man forebrain are most progressive and most developed.

Skull

C Call .
2 sat - Forebrain
Mid brain

“Pons | Hindbrain

Spinal cord

Fig: 10,02 Human brain in Sagital Section

f025
b) Mid brain or Mesencephalon ; The upper part of the hind brain is the mid
brain or mesencephalon. It is a bridge between the fore brain and the hind brain.
Its functions is to co-ordinate the activities of various muscles and maintain
balance. It also plays an important role in vision (seeing) and hearing.

e) Hind brain or Rhombencephalon : This consists of cerebellum, pons and
medulla oblongata.

(i) Cerebellum: Cerebellum is located at
the back part of the pons. It is divided into
the right and left lobes. Its exterior part is
composed of grey matter and the inner part
of white matter. The cerebellum controls
muscle stress, co-ordinates movement,
balance, control and the activities of
voluntary muscles.

(ii) Pons : The pons is located in between
the medulla oblongata and mid brain. It
is cylindrical and consists of a bunch of nerves.

Tt forms a connection between the cerebellum
and the medulla oblongata.

(iii) Medulla oblongata : It is the most
posterior part of the brain. Its front part is
connected with the pons and the back to the
spinal cord,

There ate 12 pairs of cranial nerves,
extending from the cerebrum and medulla
oblongata. Within these eight pairs of
nerves originate from the medulla
oblongata. These nerves control the
functions of the heart, lungs, pharynx, and = Figure: 10.035 Human nervous
swallowing of food, These nerves are also eywtors

associated with functions, such as

hearing, balancing.

Forma-27, Biology Class-9-10

12 pairs of cranial nerves originate from the brain and spread to different regions:
mouth cavity or buccal cavity, tongue, eye, nose, ear. These nerves are sensory
or motor or mixed in nature.

Spinal cord : The spinal cord originates from the posterior part of the medulla,
leaves the skull through the foramen magnum, and extends upto the lumber
vertebra. It is protected by the vertebral column. The spinal cord is composed of
grey matter and white matter. But their position is quite opposite to the brain.

The white matter is at the outer part and the grey matter is at the inner part. 31
pairs of nerves originate from the spinal cord and pass through the hole located
in between the vertebrae. These are the nerves of the neck, shoulder, chest, back,
hands and legs. These nerves are mixed in nature.

Nervous tissue

Tissue that can receive stimulus from the environment and can transmit
accordingly to make an appropriate response, is called nervous tissue. Nervous
tissue is composed of many nerve cells or neurons. The neuron is the basic
functional unit of the nervous system.

Structure of neuron: The neuron is made up of two parts a) cell body and
b) Elongated part,

a) Cell body: The part of the neuron which contains a nucleus, and cytoplasm,
remains bounded by plasma membrane, and is round, oval, or star shaped is
known as cell body. The cytoplasm contains mitochondria, golgi bodies,
lysosome, fat, glycogen, nissel's granules.

b) Elongated part: A variable number of nerve fibers extends from the cell
body, which are called elongated part. Elongated parts are of two types, e.g.-

(i) Dendron: There are small branched elongations around the cell body called
dendrons. The branches coming out from the dendron are called dendrites. The
number of dendrites in a cell body may be from zero to more than one hundred.
Dendrites receive stimuli from other nerves.

2025
ln
=
my

(ii) Axon: A long extension originates
from the cell body called Axon. A thin
layer encloses the axon called the
neurilemma, There is a fatty layer
between the neurilemma and the axon.
It is called the myelin. The end part of
the axon is divided into axon terminals
and, these terminals send a impulse to
the dendrites of other neurons.
Numerous axons and dendrites units
together form a nerve.

The myelin sheath is not continuous.
Generally, it is interrupted at regular
intervals. There is a direct connection
of neurilemma and axon at the
interrupted parts, This non-myelinated part
is known as node of Ranvier. The
membrane which covers the main axis
of the axon is called the axolema.

The terminal end of one neuron does
not join directly to the next (2nd)
dendrite of the neuron cell. This
junction of two neurons is called the
synapse. Nerve impulses are transmitted
through axon terminal synapses
to neuron by an electrochemical

Figure : 10.04 A neuron

Nerve impulse
through
electrochemical

process

Figure : 10.03 Nerve impulse

process. A liquid is present in the synapse, called the neurohumor or
neurotransmitter. Nerve impulses are transmitted from one neuron to another by
crossing synapse. Through this, nerve impulses or stimuli travel in one direction
only. In the human brain there are nearly hundred billions of neurons and each
neuron is connected to seven to ten thousand neurons through synapses.
Vertebral bone Transverse section
through spinal cord

Figure 10.06 : Spinal cord

The main function of the nerve is to conduct nerve impulse. Sensory neurons
receives stimulation through receptors and transmit it to the brain, then
motor nerves send those impulses from the brain to effectors.

Overs

Activity: Draw a labelled diagram of a neuron.

Shine a torch light in your friend's eye. Immediately his pupil contracts, Why
does this happen? The impulse reaches the brain from the retina and brain
instructs the circular muscle of the lens to contract. So, the pupil becomes small.
The sudden stimuli causes an automatic reaction, so the eye closes instantly.

Reflex action : A reflex action is a sudden response or automatic reaction.
If needle pricks the hand or we touch a hot objeci, we immediately move the
hand from the source of stimulation. This is the result of a reflex action. We can
not willfully control the reflex. These actions are controlled by the spinal cord,
not by the brain. That is, the immediate response to a specific stimulus,
controlled by spinal cord instead of brain, is called a reflex action.
Example: A needle prick on the finger while sewing carelessly may cause a
sudden jerking away of the hand. That is a reflex action. The events in such a

2025
2025

reflex action are as follows :

At the time of pricking the dendrites of the sensory neuron of finger’s skin
accepts the stimulus. The skin acts as a receptor. This stimulus transmits from
the finger to the grey matter of the spinal cord through the axon of the neuron.
The relay neurons transmit impulses from the spinal cord to the dendrite of
motor neuron, Here impulse is transmitted from the axon of the sensory neuron
located at the grey matter of the spinal cord to the dendrite of the motor nerve by
electro chemical process. So the impulse from the dendrites ultimately reaches
the muscle and the muscle contracts (according to he command of the central
nervous system). So the hand moves away from the source of the stimulation
automatically.

Dendrite of afferent
neuron of the finger Cell body of
skin receives the pain Axon of Relay neuron

afferent neuron.

‘Transverse section
hrough spinal cord

: Cell body of
, efferent neuron

ees Afferent neuron

Relay neuron

Musele-adjacent Axon
terminal of efferent neuron — Efferent neuron

Figure 10.07 : Reflex arch in human
10.3.2 Peripheral Nervous System

12 pans of nerves originate from the brain and 31 pairs of nerves originate from
the spinal cord, divide into small branches and spread all over the body. These
nerves together are called the peripheral nervous system. The cranial nerves
originating from the brain control the functions of the organs, (eye, ear, nose,
tongue, teeth, face, heart, stomach etc). The nerve originating from the spinal
cord helps in the movement of organs and carries the rest of the impulses of body
io the brain.

Autonomic nervous system: The organs, which are not controlled at will, are
regulated and controlled by the autonomic nervous system. The functions of the
internal organs of the body e.g- heart, intestine, stomach, pancreas etc. are
therefore regulated by the autonomic nervous system. As there is no direct
influence of this brain and spinal cord on the functions of this system is largely
independent.

Transmission of Impulse: Numerous neuron fibers are connected to each other.
Impulses transmit through them and finally reach the brain. The velocity of this
movement is approximately 100 meter per second, though it varies depending
on the nature and type of neuron. The message is taken by the nerves [rom the
environment, and the nerves carry it like a wave and send it to the brain. These
are called nerve impulses. As a result of the neuron's activity, impulses are
transmitted to the different parts of a body. Ifa nerve impulse is transmitted to a
muscle, then the muscle responds by contracting. So, we can move our different
organs according to our need. If this impulse reaches a gland, it secretes
chemical substances. Ifa sensory nerve is stimulated, it transmits towards the
brain, and one can feel the sense of touch, sight, pain ete.

How a nerve impulse works can be explained with the example given below.
Suppose, a teacher is giving dictation and you are writing. In this event the light
reflected is from the book and stimulates the retina of your teacher’s eye and
creates an impulse. This impulse reaches the sight centre of the brain. The
centres of thought, memory etc. sends message or impulses to the voluntary
muscles of the face. Muscle accepts the impulse and contracts. Here the teacher's
muscles involved in speaking are the effectors or response organs.

2023
2025

1
Light comes from the sum 4

and reflects on the book f Lk Reflected light from the book
" enters into the eyes and
“"=—. produces impulse in retin 3

Light (Retina impulses)

4 a enters into the brain through
Teacher's voice enters Optical nerves and then
5 into the ear as sound ré brain gives necessery
Responding tw instruction wave and produces Lhe instruction to the volentary
(impulses) fom brain, stimuli in learner’s ears muscle of face
fee in-writings with ;

volumtary muscles of hand

Figure 10.08 : Impulse transmission process

The teacher's speech creates a sound wave. This sound wave stimulates the ear
drum of the student and reaches the auditory centre of the brain through the
auditory nerve. From there, impulses transmit through the centre of memory,
thinking etc. and reaches the voluntary muscles of the student’s hand through
motor nerves. Then the muscle responds and the student starts writing. Here the
students muscles are the effectors or organ response,

10.4 Hormone

There is a special kind of gland im certain animals and in humans. The
chemical substance secreted from these glands are carried by the blood and
control various physiological processes. The secretions produced by the ductless
glands or endocrine glands are known as hormones. These glands have no
separate ducts to transport hormones. Hormones are carried by blood flow and
reach specific cells, influence the biochemical function within the cells, and
regulate the biological process, Hormones are secreted from the glands
according the body's needs. Bul over and under secretion of hormones can cause
various undesirable reactions.

____.Hypothalanius——
~———.. Pituitary

__— Thyroid ——

— —~ Parathyroid-——~

Thymus

— Adrenal

Pancreas
Ovary

Testis

Figure 10.09 ; Main endocrine gland in human body

10.4.1 Introduction of main endocrine gland, functions, and secreted
hormones

(a) Pituitary gland: The pituitary gland or hypophysis ts situated beneath the brain.
It is the main hormone producing gland in the human body, because it secretes
several hormones. Some of these have an influence on other endocrine glands. It is
the smallest in size, but it is a very important endocrine gland. It secretes thyroid
stimulating hormones (TSH), gonadotropin, thyrotropin, prolactine, somatotropin
etc. Not only it effects the other glands it also secrets the growth hormone of human
body.

(b) Thyroid gland : The thyroid gland is situated at the upper part of the trachea.
It produces thyroxin hormone. Hormones secreted from the thyroid gland
generally controls human growth and the rate of metabolism. It also secretes
another hormone, calcitonin, which helps in caletum metabolism.

(c) Parathyroid gland : Humans have four parathyroid glands which are situated
in the posterior part of the thyroid gland. These hormone regulates calcium and
phosphorus metabolism by secreting parathormone hormone.

f025
(d) Thymus gland : The thymus gland is located in the neck. The thymus gland
helps in developing resistance power against diseases. In childhood it is
developed, but with the growing of age the size decreases. This gland secretes
thyroxin hormone. In adult age, this hormone is absent. In rare case, if
sometimes found, it contains a very negligible amount of hormones.

(e) Adrenal gland : The adrenal glands are located just above the kidneys.
Adrenal glands regulate essential metabolic processes. Basically this gland helps
to relief the acute mental and physical stress. These glands secrete adrenalin
hormone.

(fH) Islets of langerhans : The islets of langerhans is situated in the pancreas. The
group of cells in islets of langerhans regulate carbohydrate metabolism. Its ductless
cells secrete insulin and glucagon which regulates the level of glucose in blood.

(g) Gonad or reproductive organ : These glands are situated in the ovary of a
female and in the testis of a male. The hormones secreted from these glands
control development of sex organs and secondary sexual characters. It also
controls the development of the reproductive cycle and reproductive behavior. In
mature males and females, reproductive organs produce testosterone and
oestrogen respectively.

10.5 Abnormalities due to Hormone

(a) Thyroid problem: Sea water contains iodine. So, marine fishes are one of
the main sources of iodine for human beings. Food, containing iodine, helps to
produce the thyroid hormone. Places far away from the sea, such as - at the foot
of the Himalayas, Nepal or in the north region of Bangladesh the number of
goiter patient is high. A deficiency of thyroid hormones creates an obstruction in
mental development. It causes rough skin, round face and distinct facial features.
A good effect can be obtained by taking iodide salt, banana, sea fish, fruits, arum
etc. A detailed discussion has been made on it in chapter five.

(b) Diabetes : Within the pancreas there are ductless glands called islets of
langarhan's. These glands secrete the hormone insulin. Insulin regulates the

Forma-28, Biology Class-9-10
metabolism of carbohydrates. If the pancreas fails to produce the required

amount of insulin, then the level of glucose increases in the blood above the
normal level. Then, glucose is released in the urine. This condition is called
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes is of two types: Type - | and Type - 2. In Type - |, the
patient's body does not produce insulin at all. So, the patient has to take insulin
injections regularly. Insulin is partially produced in Type-2 patient's body. In
this situation the patient has to take medicine orally to help pancreatic cells to
produce adequate amount of insulin, Sometimes, in the case of Type-2 diabetes,
there may be the chance of permanent deficiency of insulin, or if medicine is
prohibited due to other diseases, then there is no option but to take insulin
injections. This disease is usually genetically transmitted or occurs under the
influence of the environment. It is not an infectious or contagious disease. When
the level of glucose increases in the blood above the normal level, then the
symptoms are {frequent passing of urine, excessive thirst, excessive hunger,
gradual loss of weight in spite of excessive eating, feeling tiredness and
weakness, disturbed vision, roughness of skin, and delayed healing of wounds.
Earlier it was assumed that only the elderly sulfer from this disease. Bul this idea
is not correct. People of any age can suffer from this disease. Bul people, who
do not work physically or are obese or overweight have a greater chance of
developing diabetes mellitus, This is a hereditary disease, Lf a close family
member, like father, mother, granderfather, grandmother sutler from diabetes
mellitus, then there is a greater chance of developing the disease. Because of
genetics some children produce less insulin, resulting in insulin deficiency related
disease.

Diagnosis and treatment of Diabetes mellitus: Diabetes can be detected by
testing the urine and blood sugar levels, This disease can not be fully cured, but
by treatment it can be kept under control. According to the views of doctors, the
disease can be controlled by following three 'D' s, These are Discipline, Diet and Dose.

2025
£23

(i) Discipline: Disciplined life is the best medicine for a diabetic patient. Except
this regular intake of adequate quantity of a balanced diet, according to the
advice of physician regular exercise, cleanliness and foot care, regular checking
of urinary glucose and consulting physician or doctor if any problem arises.

(ii) Diet: Dietary restriction is one of the main measures to control diabetes. A
balanced diet should be taken regular and timely according to doctors advice and
sweet items should be avoided. By following a doctor's suggested food menu,
one can get good results. There is no connection of cating or avoiding sweets
with those who do not have any diabetes mellitus.

(iii) Dose: Without doctor's advice no medicine should be taken. On doctor's
advice, oral drugs or injectable insulin may be taken regularly. If the patient is
not treated properly, his respiratory rate may decrease, while the sugar level of
the blood increases. The patient may have a heart attack. Ifa diabetes patient faints
in that case, the patient needs to be helped to sit and should be made to drink
sugar or glucose mixed water to drink. This can help to avoid critical moments.

(c) Stroke : A stroke is, when the activity of the nervous system is hampered
due to the lack of blood supply to the brain. A stroke happens in brain, not in heart,
though there is a misconception about it. A stroke can happen either by brain
hemorrhage or by blood clotting in the brain. In both cases it obstructs blood
supply to the brain. A brain hemorrhage is the most dangerous. Generally, high
blood pressure is the cause of a brain hemorrhage.

Symptoms : The symptoms occur suddenly, They are- vomiting, severe
headache, a patient becomes unconscious within a few minutes, shoulder may be
hard, muscle relaxes, respiration and pulse rate decreases, face turns red.
Sometimes without any acute symptoms only face may be shapeless or patient

may be fainted for a little time due to stroke. To measure the level of severity of
a stroke, patients should be kept under observation.

In such an emergency the patient should be transferred immediately to a hospital
and ensured proper treatment. By proper treatment the patient may survive. If
the patient survives, they may become conscious after a few days. Then the
patient becomes restless and gradually the paralysed organ’s firmness gets back.
If the speech controlled centre is harmed, then the patient may mumble. The
muscles of attached paralysed organ (such as- hand) may gradually get back its
power of movement but the patient may lose the power of doing minute work
forever. At the primary stage the patient recovers quickly but after two months
the improvement slows down. Nerves which are suddenly attacked temporarily
lose their activity. These types of strokes show rapid recovery. The nerves.
which are affected completely, lose their ability to work forever.

Diagnosis and treatment: It may be ensured by detecting if there is any blood
clotting or brain hemorrhage. In many cases the exact cause of the stroke can not
be ascertained. It is not possible to stop bleeding in the case of hemorrhage. Take
measures to keep high blood pressure under control. Surgical operation can be
done if it is necessary. Proper nursing, cleanliness, ensuring diet are very
necessary. According to the necessity arrangements can be made to feed the
patient by using a tube. According to the adviced of the physical medicine
specialist and physiotherapist. It is also necessary to move the paralysed organs,
to resist stiffness of the jomts. On gaining sense the patient is to be encouraged
to move on his or her own. When stroke symptoms are found, ensure proper
treatment as early as possible to obtain desired results.

Prevention : Avoid smoking, keep high pressure under control, diabetic patient
should take medicine regularly, keep free from anxiety and lead a normal life.

10.6 Physical disabilities due to nerve disoder

(a) Paralysis : Loss of sensation and motion (voluntary muscle) in a part of the
body is termed paralysis. When there is damage in a part of the brain, the
stimulation receiving muscles lose their activeness. Then the body is paralysed.
Partially or fully paralysis may occur. As a result, any organ of one side or both
side lose their activities, such as the paralysis of both the hands and legs.

Cause: Generally stroke is a cause of paralysis. Neck or spinal cord injury or
accidents may also be the cause of paralysis. Nerve disease, damage of spinal
cord may also be the cause of paralysis.

2025
2025

(b) Epilepsy: Epilepsy is a type of brain disease that starts with convulsions. In
many cases the patient becomes unconscious. Epilepsy is also known as fainting
disease. Because of this disease, the patient loses his ability to work temporarily
and may fall on the ground with convulsive movement. Water and fire have no
direct connection with epilepsy. [f the patient falls in water, they may not be able
to get up from water on their own and may die by drowning. Due to that reason
this type of patient should be kept away from pond, fire and other dangerous
substance or place.

The main cause of epilepsy is not yet known. Epilepsy disease become visible
among those who has already suffer from stroke. Epilepsy may have some
causes such as meningitis due to head injury, encephalitis, congenital brain
disorder or brain tumor. Epilepsy may attack at any ages. In some cases of
epilepsy there is no long term influence but in some cases there may be a chance
of permanent damage of the brain. So diagnosis must be done by a specialist and
treatment should be done accordingly.

(c) Parkinson disease : Parkinson disease is a condition of the brain that causes
jerking of the hands and legs. The patient becomes unable to walk and move,
Generally the disease starts after the age of 50 vears. But in exceptional cases
young people may suffer from this disease; in this case it is usually hereditary.

Nerve cells produce a substance called dopamine which helps in muscular
movement. Due to Parkinson disease dopamine producing cells are gradually
destroyed. Without dopamine, nerve cells become unable to send stimulation to
the muscles. So, the muscle loses its effectiveness. With the growing of age,
muscles of a patient with parkinson disease becomes more inactive. As a result
it become tough on the part of the patient to move and write.

Parkinson disease gradually tums severe. At the preliminary stage of the disease
it begins with tremor and patient has difficulty moving his leg or foot, Additionally
tremor of eye lids, constipation, trouble in swallowing of food, problem in walking
straight, stiffness in face, pain in muscles; feeling uneasiness at the time of standing,
walling, etc. are the symptoms of this disease,
With the consultation of a doctor, taking physiotherapic treatment, balanced diet
and leading a healthy life the patient may feel better.

Activity: Investigate the cause of physical distress and difficulties created
by hormonal problems and write a report on it.

10.7 Influence of tobacco and drugs on co-ordination.

In Bangladesh tobacco, ganja, charas, bhang, affim, morphin, cocaine, alcohol
and heroin etc, are known as addictive substances, Except this, in many
countries of the world some medicines are prepared artificially trom cocaine or
similar substances. These medicines create addiction. Example- Sedative pill.

There are many reasons for drug addiction in humans, such as : inquisitiveness
regarding addictive drugs, influence of friends, trying out a new experience,
looking for easy happiness, use of addictive substances in the family, easy
availability of addictive substances, family dispute and discontentment,
unemployment, economic insolvency, frustration, lack of awareness about the
harmful effects of addictive substances. Recent research on drug addiction
shows that, the main cause of drug addiction is deterioration of normal
relationships with family and society.

Use of tobaceo, chewing jarda or smoking increases nicotine levels in blood. At
first mcotine stimulates nerve cells and aiterwards it creates the demand of
nicotine in the body, To meet this demand, people become addicted to smoking
and using jarda. Nicotine destroys the effectiveness of nerve cells. Hands, legs
and head trembles involuntarily. Ij causes problems, such as: difficulties in
putting thread in the needle, drawing a straight line, writing ete.

Addiction has a bad effect on the nervous system. Due to addiction a person is
compelled to take addictive substances. His thinking capability is gradually

destroyed because of the addiction, An addicted person loses his attention to his &
ms
2025

work and fails to lead a normal life. Excess addiction makes him unconscious or
senseless. Addicted person feels extreme physical discomfort if he fails to take
drugs. Sometimes he might have an attack of convulsion. The drug addicted
persons often become associated with crime to oblain the money to purchase
drugs. There are treatment and rehabilitation centers for drug addicted persons.
So, one can get rid of the bad habit by taking treatment from rehabilitation
centers. This needs co-operation and sympathy of family members towards the
addicted person.

Harmful effects of addiction: Taking addictive substances may cause harmful
effects, such as, physical, social, economic. etc.

Measures to get out of this situation

- Keep family and social environment friendly and healthy,

~ Increase moral education.

- Arrange employment for the unemployed.

- Stop easy availability of addictive substances.

- Stay away from bad company and raise awareness about the harmful effects
of drugs.

- Initiate social mobilization and strongly enforce laws regarding addiction.
We should not hate or neglect the addicted persons. They are to be handled
syntpathically and atrangements should be made to rehabilate them. Take the
assistance of rehabilitation centers if it is necessary. In Bangladesh the
Directorate of Nareotie Control was established and started functioning in 1990.
Day by day its field of work is widening. In this program law making, its
implementation, control, treatment and rehabilitation are noteworthey.

[ Activity: Draw a poster or leaflet regarding the bad effect of tobacco and !

| addictive substances and present it to the students in the classroom.
A Biology
@ Exercise

1. What is a phylohormone?

2. What is gravitational feeling?

3. What is the nervous system?

4, What constitutes the central nervous system?
5. Write down the causes of paralysis?

1. Discuss the role of hormones in the growth of plants.
2. Write down the symptoms of thyroid problem?

<a,
1, What hormone is secreted by the thymus gland?
a) Thyroxine b) Parathyroxine
c) Thymoxine d) Thyrotrapine
2, Islet of langarhans —
i) helps in carbohydrate metabolism.
ti) secretes insulin hormone.
iii) controls metabolism of the body.

Which one is correct?
a) i b)i & ii
¢) ti & iii d) i, tt & iii

On the basis of the following diagram answer the questions 3 and 4,
3. Which one of the following is applied to *A* shown in the picture.
a. Phototropism b. Geotropism
c. Hydrotropism e, Chemotropism
4. Which one of the following is applicable in the
development of part A shown in the picture.
a. Auxin b. Gibberellin
¢, Cytokinin d. Abscisic acid

225
1. During visit with her father to an agricultural farm Ohona observes different
types of plants. She notices some small seedlings kept in electrical light ina
cold room. She also observes that flowering is nol occurring in some fruit,
irees, and some fruits being immature, are falling olf the trees.

What is biological clock?

What does it mean by vernalization?

¢. What are the causes of the problems found in the fruit trees mentioned in the
stem above?

d. Analyse the causes of keeping the seedling in the environment notices seen

by Ohona.

oe

a) What is reflex action?

b) Whatis hormone?

c) Explain the role of part ‘A’ of stem to create stimulation in human body.

d) The structure and nature of the cell given in the picture is different from a
normal cell- Analyse it.

Forma-29, Biology Class-9-10
