2025

Chapter Four
Periodic Table

Ed li
Ze ORME a
be he Be <-8!
[e262 *er=F7E een ek=
% |) Bre sae?¢ sees Font

me? wow efeme@mad Or=
ev hd at =

On. ste’ BEB €San8n
ee lod - ES re a= FF

A total of 118 elements are identified on earth up to the year 2016. Study and
research in chemistry requires some idea about the physical properties and
characteristic features of all these elements. Some of these elements among them
show some common features. There had been efforts among the scientists for a
long time to group such elements together and put all the elements in a chart. It
took hundreds of years of efforts of various scientists, numerous changes and
extensions to get us such a complete table so far, which is known as the Periodic
‘Table. It is a significant achievement m chemical research. A sound knowledge
of this periodic table and its features enables anyone with knowledge about not
only the elements but also the compounds formed with them. This chapter will
give you some introduction to this periodic table and properties and
characteristics of elements in the table.
60

i,

*

Chemistry

® By the end of the chapter, we will be able to -

describe the background of the development of periodic table
determine the relation of the principal groups of elements of
the periodic table with the electronic configuration of outermost
energy levels

determine the period of an element

assume the physical and chemical properties of an clement in
relation to its position in the periodic table

describe the reasons for special naming of elements

explain the significance of the periodic table

show that the compounds formed by the elements of the same
group have similar properties.

make proper use of glass apparatus at the time of experiments
take precautions at the ime of experiments

show interest in assuming the properties of elements

following the periodic table

£023
2025

Periodic Table 61

4,1 Background of Periodic Table

Periodic Table is the outstanding collection of chemical concepts gathered over
hundreds of years. It is not an achievement of one single scientist or a one day’s
effort. Various scientists have given their tireless effort afler it to get the present
state of the table.

In 1789, Antoine Lavoisier first divided the elements like Oxygen, Nitrogen,
Hydrogen, Phosphorus, Mercury, Zinc, Sulphur etc. into metals and non-metals.
Then on, there was constant effort to divide the elements in groups having the
same characteristics.

In 1829, the scientist Doberemeir found that groups of three elements show the
same kind of features. First, he organized the elements into threes according to
their atomic mass. Then he marked that atomic mass of the second element Is
half or near about half of the summation of first and third’s atomic mass.
Dobereineir identified Chlorine, Bromine and Iodine as the first trio of chemical

elements. It is known as Dobereineir’s Law of Triads,

For the elements detected up to 1864, English scientist John A R Newlands gave
a theory called Law of Octet. According to it, if elements are organized
following a sequence of lower to higher atomic mass. there is evident similarity
in physical and chemical properties of each eighth element.

In the year 1869, Russian scientist Mendeleev published a table in an attempt to
contain elements with similar properties in the same group. Reviewing the
physical and chemical properties, he theorized, “Physical and chemical
properties of elements return periodically as atomic mass of elements increase.”

Following this theory, he organized the 63 elements identified till then in eight
vertical columns and 12 horizontal lines. Thus he proved that elements
belonging to each column have the same physical and chemical properties and in
each line, they change gradually as they progress from lefi to right. The table was
named Periodic Table.
62 Chemistry

1
Group number 6
: Atomic number 24 52. | Atomic mass
2| Cr
Paried number 4 Symbol

Chromium N fed F
ame of elemen
carrera

Elements of
Lanthanide senes

Elements of Actinide) Ac
series
2025

Periodic Table

Modern Periodic Table

64 Chemistry

Another success of Mendeleey’s table is his correct forecast about the
existence of some elements. He kept some cells in his table blank as there were
only 63 of them detected till then. Later on, these cells were accommodated by
detected elements, proving Mendeleev correct.

There are some flaws in Mendeleev’s table. According to his theory, elements
with lesser atomic mass were supposed to be set before the elements with higher
atomic mass. However, in Mendeleev’s table, Argon with its atomic mass 40 is
placed before Potassium with atomic mass 39. He did this to group according to
similarity of physical and chemical properties. There are some other cases with
similar flaws and other flaws in Mendeleev’s table.

In 1913, scientist Mosley proposed to organize elements according to their
atomic number instead of atomic mass. When the table was reorganized
according to atomic number of elements, Argon (18) came automatically before
Potassium (19) and thus the flaw in Mendeleev’s table was corrected.

International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (TUPAC) has so lar detected
118 elements. TUPAC supervises and controls different matters of chemistry and
applied chemistry- like creating various rules and regulations, overseeing
which of the escalating changes or inventions are to be accepted or discarded
etc.

Lavoisier started with only 33 elements which became 63 detected and 4
undetected elements in Mendeleev’s table. Now, that attempt has turned out to
be the modern periodic table with 118 detected elements.

4.2 Characteristics of the Periodic Table

The periodic table is basically a table of elements. It also features columns and
rows, In the periodic table, the rows from left to right are called Periods and
vertical columns are called Groups. There are a total of 118 elements
accommodated in the cells of the table, which is there for you at the beginning
of this chapter.

2025
Periodic Table 65

The modern periodic table has some prominent characteristics. You can find
these features if you take a closer look at the table.

a. There are seven periods (horizontal rows) and 18 groups (vertical

columns) in the periodic table.

b. All periods start with group 1 at the extreme lefi and extend up to group

18 at the extreme right.

c. Asmall table of 2 horizontal rows and 14 columns displays the
Lanthanide and Actinide elements beneath the main periodic table, These
are part of period 6-7 of the main periodic table.

d. Period 1 contains only two elements. Periods 2 and 3 contain eight
elements each. Period 4 and 5 contain 18 elements each. Periods 6 and 7
contain 32 elements each.

e. Group | contains 7 elements. Group 2 contains 6 elements. Group 3 has

32 elements. Groups 4 to 12 contain 4 elements each. Groups 13-17 have

6 elements each. Group 18 contains 7 elements.

Fifteen elements with atomic numbers 57 to 71 are called the Lanthanide
elements. Fifteen elements with atomic numbers 89 to 103 are categorized as
Actinide elements. Physical and chemical properties of elements belonging to
each of these two categories are so close that they have been put separately in

two separated rows.

Now consider the periodic table in terms of properties of elements.

1. Properties of elements change from left to right in the same period.

2. The physical and chemical properties of elements of the same group are
almost similar.

Forma-9, Chenustry Class-9-10
66 Chemistry

4.3 Determination of the Position of Elements in the

Periodic Table from Their Electronic Configuration

We can easily determine the group and period of an element from the electronic
configuration of that element. The system of finding out the place of an element
in the periodic table is discussed below:

Determining the Period Number

The number of the outermost main energy level in the electronic configuration of
an element is the period number of that element. For example: the electronic
configuration of Lithium is Li(3) 1s*2s! . Since the outermost energy level of
Lithium is the second one. so the clement belongs to the period 2 of the table. In
the same way, the electronic configuration of Potassium is K(19)
1872s?2p*3s?3p*4s! . Since the outermost energy level of Potassium is the fourth
one, 80 the element belongs te the period 4 of the table.

Determining the Group

The group number of an element can be deternained in a number of ways.
System 1: If the outermost energy level of an element consists of s orbital only,
the total number of electrons in thats orbital is the group number of that element.
The electronic configuration of Hydrogen is H(1)1s'. Since the outermost energy
level of Hydrogen consists of s orbital and it contains only 1 electron, so the
element belongs to the group | of the table.

System 2: If the outermost energy level of an element consists of s and p orbitals
only, the total number of electrons in those s and p orbitals added with 10 is the
group number of that element. The electronic configuration of Boron is
B(5)-1s?2s*2p' . Since the outermost energy level of Boron consists of s and p
orbitals and they contain 2 + 1 =3 electrons, so the element belongs to the group
3 + 10= 13 of the table.

System 3: [f the outermost energy level of an element consists of an s orbital
which is preceded by a d orbital in the inner level, the total number of electrons
in those s and d orbitals is the group number of that element. The electronic

20235
2025

Periodic Table 67

configuration of Fe is Fe(26)-1s?2s’2p* 3s73p%3d°4s" . Since the outermost energy
level of Iron consists of s and is preceded by a d orbital and they contain
6+2=8 electrons, so the element belongs to the group 8 of the table.

To make it easier for you to understand, the electronic configuration of the outer
most energy level has been denoted by red colour.

Table 4.01; Electronic Configuration of Elements and their Groups.

Period

Element Electronic Configuration | umber Group Number
H(1) 1s? 1 1 (System 1)
He(2) 1s* 1 18 (Exception)
ae a |
Be(4)
B(5) 1s? 2s? 2p? 2 2 +1410 =13 (System 2)
c(6)
N (7) 157 25? 2p? 2 2 +3+10= 15 (System 2)|
o(s) 1s? 2s* 2p* 2 2 +4+10=16 (System 2)|
F(9) 1s? 2s? ap? 2 2 *5+*10=17 (System 2)/
Ne(10) 1s? 25% ap* 2 2 +6+10=18 (System 2)|
Na(11)
Mg(12) 1s* 2s? 2p* 35? 3 2 (System 1)
AlQ3)
$i(14) 1s? 25? 2p* 3s* 3p* 3 2 +2+10=14 (System 2)
P (15) 1s? 2s? Z2p* 3s 3p" 3 2 +3+10=15 (System 2)
§ (16)
cl(17) 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p? 3 2 +5+10=17 (System 2)
Ar(18) 1s? 2s? 2p* 3s? 3p* 3 2 +6+10=18 (System 2)
K(19) 1s* 2s* 2p" 3s* 3p%4s! 4 1 (System 1)
Ca(20) 1s* 2s? Zp* 35? 3p*4s? 4 2 (System 1)
Sc(21)
Ti(22) 1s? 2s? 2p* 35” 3p® 3d? 4s? | 4 24254 (System 3)
V(23) 1s? 2s? 2p* 3s? 3p* 3d? 45 | 4 243=5 (System 3)

68 Chemisiry

Cr(24) 1s* 2s* 2p° 3s* 3p* 3d° 4s’ | 4 1+ 5 = 6 (System 3)
Mn(25) 1s? 25" 2p° 3s? 3p* 3d? 45* | 4 2 +5 = 7 (System 3)
Fe(26)

Co(27) 1s* 25? Zp* 3s* 3p* 3d’ 4s" | 4 2+ 7 =9 (System 3)
Ni(28) 1s* 2s* 2p* 3s* 3p* ad® 4s* | 4 2 + 8 = 10 (System 3)
Cul29) 1s? 25" 2p* 3s? 3p® 3d" 4s? | 4 1+ 10 = 11(System 3)
Zn (30) 1s* 2s* 2p* 3s? 3p* 3d!" 4s? | 4 2 + 10 = 12 (System 3)

Student Activity: Fill up the blank spaces of elements with atomic
numbers 3, 4, 6, 11, 13, 16, 21, 26 of the above table with necessary
information.

4.4 Electronic Configurations of Elements are the Main Basis of
the Periodic Table

Electronic configuration serves to identify the group and period of an element in
the periodic table. Again, elements having the same electron arrangement in
their outermost orbit belong to the same group. On the other hand, elements with
different configuration of electrons in their outermost shell belong to separate

groups.

Table 4.02: Group and Electronic Configuration.

Group] Group 2

Element Electronic Configuration | Element Electronic Configuration
H(1) 1s! He(2) | 1s?

Li(3) Ls?2s* Be(4) 1s?25?

Na(11) | 1s*2s72p%3s! Mg(12) | 1s?25*2p*3s?

K(19) | 1s2s?2p°3s*3p*4s' Ca(20) | 1s*2s*2p°3s*3p%4s?

£023
2025

Periodic Table 69

The elements with one electron in the outer shell generally tend to give away the
electron and become positive ions. Sodium has one electron in its outer shell. So,
it donates the electron and becomes a positive ion.

Na (1s?2s*2p°3st) +r Na’ (1s’2s*2p*) + &

Again, elements with seven electrons in the outer shell generally tend to accept
an electron and become negative ions. Chlorine has seven electrons in its outer
shell. So, it accepts one electron and becomes a negative ion,

Cl (1s?2s?2p*3s?3p*) + @ ——» CTI (1s72s*2p*3s?3p*)

So, electronic configuration helps us to determine the position of an element in
the periodic table and explain their various characteristics as well. Therefore,
electronic configuration is considered as the main basis of the periodic table.

4.5 Some Exceptions in the Periodic Table

a. The Position of Hydrogen: Hydrogen is a non-metal. However, the periodic
table displays hydrogen alongside strong electropositive alkali metals like Na,
K, Rb, Cs, Fr etc. in group 1. It is because the outer shell of H contains only 1
electron like the alkali metals. Besides, many properties of Hydrogen are similar
to those of alkali metals. On the other hand, Hydrogen is also able to accept an
electron like the Halogen elements (F, Cl, Br, I), meaning it has some similarities
with Halogen in terms of properties. However, since most of the properties of
Hydrogen have similarity with alkali metals, it is placed alongside the alkali
metals.

b.The Position of Helium: The electronic configuration of Helium is He(2) >
1s*, According to its configuration, it was supposed to be positioned in group 2,
But the elements of group 2 are strongly electropositive. They are called alkaline
earth metals. On the other hand, Helium is an inert gas. Its properties are similar
to other inert gases like Neon, Argon, Krypton, Xenon and Redon. And its
properties are not at all similar to the alkaline carth metals. Therefore, Helium is
placed alongside the inert gases in group 18.
70 Chemistry

ce. The Position of Lanthanide and Actinide Groups: The Lanthanide
elements are supposed to be set in the period 6 and group 3 of the periodic table,
The original position of Actinide group is in period 7 and group 3. If they are
placed in these positions, that hampers the beauty of the table. Therefore, to
maintain the beauty of the table, these two groups of elements are moved to a
separate table just beneath the main table.

4.6 Periodic Properties of Elements

The elements in the periodic table have some properties, like: metallic
properties, non-metallic properties, atomic radius, ionization energy, electro
negativity, electron affinity etc. These properties are called periodic properties

a. Metallic Property: Elements which are glossy, produce metallic sound
when struck, and conductor to heat and electricity, we call them metals. Modern
definition goes, the elements that turn into positive ions donating one or more
electrons are metals. This property to donate electrons by the metals is called
metallic property. The more an element is prone to donate electrons it is
regarded to be endowed with more metallic property. Lithium (Li) is a metal as

it donates an electron and becomes Li’,
lim [fF +e

Any period in the periodic table has got the most metallic on the left and
gradually elements are less metallic as the period extends to the right.

b. Non-metallic Property: Elements which are not glossy, don’t produce
metallic sound and non conductor of heat and electricity are called non-metallic.
In the modern terminology, the elements which turn into negative ions accepting
one or more electrons are called non-metallic elements. This tendency to accept
electrons is called their non-metallic property. The more an element is prone to
accept electrons il is regarded to be endowed with more non-metallic property.
Chlorine (Cl) is a non-metal as it accepts an electron and becomes CI.

clee —-cl

2025
2025

Periodic Table a

Any period in the periodic table becomes more non-metallic as it extends to the
right.

Some elements are there which sometimes behave like metals and sometimes
behave like non-metals. They are called sub-metals. According to modern
definition, elements that sometimes tend to donate electrons and sometimes
accept electrons are called sub-metals. Silicon (Si) is a sub metal.

In the periodic table, the left periods are metals. middle periods are sub metals
and the right side periods are non-metals.

c. Atomic Radius/ Size of Atom: The size of atom or the atomic radius 1s a
periodic property, The more a period progresses from left to right, the size of
atom/atomic radius decreases. Again, vertically in the periodic table, the lower

we go from the upper part, the size of atom increases.

In a period, the more we move from left to right, the atomic number mereases.
but the shell number remains unchanged. As the atomic number increases.
number of protons in the nucleus increases and so do the number of electrons.
The attraction between the increased number of electrons and protons also
increases, resulting in the electron containing shells getting closer to the nucleus.
As aresult, the atomic radius decreases.

The size of atom decreases from lett
tonght of a period

O @Ode

@ @0e

Again, in a same group, the lower we
move from the upper part, a new shell
is added to the outer layer. These added
shells increase the size of the atom.

Noteworthy that, newer shells increase
the size of atom more than the added

to bottom of a group

electrons and protons decrease the size.
That is why, the lower part of the
periodic table contains elements with

OC)
O
©
O

The size of atom increases from top

Fig 4.01: Periodic Property of Atomic Radius.
bigger atoms.
72

d. Ionization Energy: The energy
that is required to transform an
element into one mole positive ion
removing one mole electron from
its one mole atom in its gaseous
state is called the ionization energy
of that element. It is a periodic
property. In the same period,
elements of the left side have
greater radius than those of the
right side. When the atomic radius
is less, the ionization energy is
greater and vice-versa.

Example:

Chemistry

Eletmination of

an electron 5

Three electrons in Liatom Two electrons n Liv
100
Fig 4.02: Ionization of Element.

The ionization energy of Siis greater than Na, Mg and Al because the atomic
radius of $1 is the smallest among all these elements. On the other hand, Na,

having the biggest radius among them is endowed with the least ionization

energy.

Of the alkali metals in group-1, ie. Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs and Fr, Li has the
smallest atomic radius and the highest ionization energy.

Again, of the elements in group-17, i.e. F, Cl, Br, land At, F has the smallest
atomic radius and the highest ionization energy.

e, Electron Affinities: The energy emitted when we try to transform an element
in its gaseous state into one mole negative ion by mjecting one mole electron
into its one mole atom is called the electron affinity of that element. It is a
periodic property. In the same period, elements of the lett side have greater
radius than those of the right side. When the atomic radius is less, the electron

affinity is greater and vice-versa.

2025
Periodic Table 73

Problem: Of the elements Be, Ca, Sr, Ba, Mg and Ra, some display greater
electron affinity and some lesser.

Solution: All these elements belong to group-2. Be among them has got the
lowest atomic radius and that is why, its electron affinity is higher. Again, Ra
among them has the highest radius and the least electron affinity.

Problem: Of the elements Na, Mg, Al, and Si, which has the strongest
electron affinity and which has the least?

Solution: All these elements belong to period-3. Na among them has got the
highest atomic radius and that is why, Sodium’s electron affinity is the least.
Again, $i among them has the least radius and the highest electron affinity,

f. Electronegativity: When two atoms tum into a molecule by covalent bonds,
the atoms in that molecule attract the electrons towards themselves. This
attraction is called electronegativity. It is a periodic property. In the same period,
elements of the left side have a greater radius than those of the right side. When
the atomic radius is less, the electronegativity is greater and vice-versa. For
example, The Na atom in the period-3 of the table has the least electronegative
attraction and Cl has the most.

4.7 The Special Names of Elements Present in Various Groups

Elements were bestowed special names at different times based on their
physical and chemical properties. Apart from metals, non-metals and sub metals
already discussed, there are also some others.

Alkali Metals: There are seven elements in Group-1 of the table. Apart from
Hydrogen, the six other elements here (Lithium, Sodium, Potassium, Rubidium,
Cesium and Francium) are called alkali metals. They are thus called since all of
them are soluble in water and when dissolved in water, they produce Hydrogen
gas and alkali.

Forma-10, Chemistry Class-9-10
74 Chemistry

Alkaline Earth Metals: The periodic table contains six elements- Beryllium,
Magnesium, Calcium, Strontium, Barium and Radium in its Group-2. These
elements are called alkaline carth metals. They are available as various
compounds in soil and all of them produce alkali. That is why, they are grouped
under alkaline earth metals.

Coin Metals: Copper. Silver, Gold and Rontzanium are four metals belonging to
Group-11, The first three of them are called com metals as they were used to
produce coins from the ancient age and were used as a means of trade and
commerce.

Halogen Group: Six elements of Group-17 are called Halogens. They are
Fluorine, Chlorine, Bromine, Iodine, Astatine and Tennesine. The meaning of
halogen is salt maker. Metals bonding with these elements produce salts, like Na
and F bond together to produce Sodium Fluoride, Na and Cl together produce
Sodium Chloride ete. The main source of halogens is the sea salt. They
themselves form di-atomic molecules by sharing electrons, like Cl,, 1, etc.

Inert Gas: Elements belonging to Group-18 are called inert gases. They are
Helium, Neon, Argon, Krypton, Xenon, Redon and Oganeson. As their
outermost energy level is filled with electrons, they do not show any tendency to
form compounds by accepting, donating or sharing electrons. ‘This inaction in
chemical reaction or chemical bonds gives them their group name. They remain
in gaseous form at normal temperature.

Transition Elements: Elements of Group-3 to Group-12 are known as
transition elements. Compounds produced with these elements get some colour.
These transition elements act as catalysts in chemical reactions. Nickel of
Group-10 is an example of this kind which is used in various organic reactions.

20235
na
i
ry

Periodic Table 75

Problem: Why is Ca called an alkaline earth metal?

Solution: Different compounds of the metal Ca are available in soil which
makes it an earth metal. Again, Hydroxide compound of Ca, Ca(OH), is an
alkali. Therefore, it is also alkaline.

Problem: Why is He an inert gas? Explain.

Solution: He doesn’t bond with the other elements of its group. Neither is it
interested in bonding with other elements. So, Helium is an inert element. Since,

at normal temperature, it remains in gaseous form, so we call it an inert gas.

4.8 Advantages of the Periodic Table

The periodic table is a highly significant contribution of various chemists of
different ages. Practice of chemistry is not possible without the modern periodic
table. Some of the advantages of this chart are presented below.

a. Simplifying Study of Chemistry: We know that a total of 118 elements have
been identified till 2016. If we consider only four physical properties (melting
point, boiling point, density and state of matter) and four chemical properties
(reaction with Oxygen, water, acid and alkali), then that turns out 118 x (4+4)=
944 properties for these elements. It is impossible to remember all this
information. The periodic table has simplified that task. If we know the common
properties belonging to each group in the table, we will also be aware of the
common properties of all these elements. Again, since we will be familiar with
the common properties of elements, we will also know the properties of

compounds made with them.

b. Detection of New Elements: there were some blank cells in the periodic
table even some decades ago. The periodic table gave us prior idea about the
elements that will be accommodating those cells and their properties even
76 Chemistry

before they were detected. You have already known that. Mendeleev had
mentioned about four elements in his periodic table which were later detected.

ce. In Research: The periodic table has a large contribution in the field of
research too, Suppose, a scientist is interested to invent a new matter to meet up
a specific purpose. In that case, he must have some conception about what the
properties would be of the new matter and what kind of elements will be able to
produce the new matter. He will get this idea from the periodic table.

You will gradually come to know about the other advantages of the periodic
table.

4.9 Reactions Occurring in the Elements of the Same Group

An experiment will tell you that elements of the same group exhibit the same
kind of properties,

The gases F,. Cl,, Br,, 1, etc. belonging to Group-17 react with Hydrogen and
produce HF (g), HCl (g). HBr (g), HI (g) gases respectively.

Hg) + Fx(g) ———* 2HF (g)
H,(g) + Cl,(g) ———* 2HCI (g)
H,(g) + Br;(g) ———» 2HBr (g)
H,(g) + 1(g) ————» 2HI (g)

Again, if we dissolve these produced gases into water, they produce hydrohalide
acids, i.e. Hydrofluoric acid, Hydrochloric acid, Hydrobromic acid, Hydroiodic acid,

HF(g) + Hz0 (1) ———> HF (aq)
HCl(g) + H,O (1) ——— HCl (aq)
HBr(g) + H,O (1) ———» HBr (aq)
Hi(g) + H,0 (1) ———» HI (aq)

These hydrohalide acids react with any carbonate salt and produce Carbon
dioxide gas, e.g. Calcium Carbonate and Hydrofluoric acid produce Carbon
dioxide:

£023
2025

Periodic Table fet

CaCO, + 2HF (aq) ————» CaF, + H,0 + CO,
The same kind of reaction will take place with Hydrochloric acid:
CaCO, + 2HCl (aq) SS CaCl, + HyO+ CO,

So, the above reactions convince you that the elements of Group-17 exhibit the
same properties and reactions. Mg and Ca of Group-2 also exhibit the same
properties and reactions.

Magnesium Carbonate (MgCO,) in its reaction with light Hydrochloric acid
produces Magnesium Chloride, water and Carbon dioxide gas. Calcium
Carbonate (CaCO,), in the same reaction produces Calcium Chloride, water and
Carbon dioxide gas.

MgCO,+ 2HCl ———* Mol, + H,0 + CO,
CaCO,+ 2HC| ———* CaCl, + H,0 + CO,

fr.
Name of Experiment; Identifymg Carbon dioxide gas in the reaction

between Calcium Carbonate and light Hydrochloric acid.

Principle: Calcium Carbonate and light Hydrochlorie acid produce
Calcium Chloride. water and Carbon dioxide gas.

CaCO;+ 2HCl ———* CaCl, + H,0+ CO,
Apparatus: a. one conical flask b. a thistle funnel c. a u-shaped delivery
tube made of glass d. some gas jars e. cork with bore.

Chemicals: Calcium Carbonate, dilute hydrochloric acid and water

hai A

78 Chemistry

ts vsoniiven >
1. Take some small pieces of calcium carbonate in the round bottom
flask.

2. With the help of the cork, put in the thistle funnel and the delivery
tube inside the Wolf bottle.

3, Put in some water in the round bottom flask through the thistle

Thistle funnel

bent glass tube

rl
|

i——_ sasjar

round bottom
flask

—— == ———— 7

HEI CaCO,
Fig 4.05: Preparation of Carbon Dioxide.

funnel so that the chemicals within and the edge of the thistle funnel
remain submerged.
4. Set the other end of the exhaust tube inside a gas jar.

5. Now, slowly add dilute hydrochloric acid through the thistle funnel.
You will see, the carbon dioxide gas bubbles produced in the reaction
are coming out through the exhaust tube.

6. Let’s preserve the carbon dioxide gas in the gas jar. Since the gas is
\ heavier than air, it will gather in the lower part of the jar. P

2025
2025

Periodic Table 79

(existe the Properties of Carbon Dioxide Gas: \

1. Let’s check the colour of the produced gas in the jar. It is
colourless like carbon dioxide.

2, Let’s hold a lighted matchstick on the open face of the gas jar. It
will be extinguished, It is decided that carbon dioxide helps to
extinguish fire.

3. Let’s pass the produced gas inside a test tube containing lime

water or calcium hydroxide. First, a small quantity of gas will enter
the tube and create white calcium carbonate residue at the base.
The lime water will be dull. Now pass more carbon dioxide gas
into the solution. This will produce calcium bicarbonate which will
clear the lime water.

Caution:

1. Measures were taken so that the end of the thistle funnel was

submerged in the water.

2, The round-base flask was fixed with a stand.

The same experiment can be done with snails, oysters, egg shells as
substitute for calcium carbonate and vinegar substituting for hydrochloric

Z

acid.

80

1. What is the main basis of the modern periodic table?
a. atomic number b. atomic mass

c. relative atomic mass d. electronic configuration

2. A—+1s? 2s* 2p* 3s? 3p® 3d? 4s*. Which group of the periodic table does the
element belong to?

a. Group-2 b. Group-5
ec. Group-11 d. Group-13
Answer questions 3 and 4 from the following table:

It is an intersection of a group from periodic table :

wk

x Here X and ¥ are symbols, they do not represent actual elements
av-

ssi

3. Which period of the periodic table does the element belong to?
a. 3" b, 4@
es d. 6%

4. The shown elements have-
i. one electron in their outer shell

ii. atomic radius decreases as we go from top to bottom

iii, element ¥ is more active than element X
Which is correct?
a. land Li b. ii and ili

c.iand iii d.i, ii and iti

2025
Periodic Table

$l

1,
F
Na | Mg cl
Br

Diagram of the stem is a part of the periodic table.
a, Write down the Triads Law.

b. Why is Barium called alkaline earth metal?
c. Which of the elements in the stem is the biggest in size? Explain

d. Analyze the electron affinity of the elements in the stem as we move
periodically from left to right.

2:
Group 1 |Group 2 | Group 3
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4 | A B C

a. Write down the modern formula of the periodic table.
b. Why is B called an alkaline earth metal?

c. Explain the change in the size of atom from A to B.

d. Analyze the change in ionization energy as we progress from A to C.

Forma-11, Chemistry Class-9-10
