2025

Chapter two
The Important Ideas of Economics

It is important to know some significant facts about economics to acquire a
thorough idea of economics. The definition of resources and products and
their classification, opportunity cost and choice, income, saving, investment,
economic and non-economic activities, and above all, the activities of the people
of Bangladesh have been discussed in this chapter. Before entering into the main
discussion of economics, these concepts will be helpful to understand
economics.

After studying this chapter, we will be able to-

* illustrate the concept of economic resources;

* compare natural resources, human resources and produced goods;

* notify different economic resources of Bangladesh;

« describe what a product is:

« differentiate between freely accessible goods and economic goods;
* compare permanent and temporary consumable products:

e differentiate between intermediate and capital products:

e illustrate the concepts of opportunity cost and choice:

e determine the relation between income, savings and investment and

* prepare a sector-wise list of different economic activities of Bangladesh.
20 Economics

2.1 Economic Resources

We all are more or less acquainted with the term, 'resource'. The word resource
comes in our daily conversations in many different ways. For example, Mr.
Sujan owns a lot of resources. But to an economist, everything is not a resource.
In economics, the products or goods which are to be obtained by spending
money are considered as resources. Briefly, we also call them economic goods.
For example, houses, furniture, television, etc. are visible material resources and
doctor's services, teacher's lessons are invisible or non-material resources. To
obtain these things, money has to be spent. If any particular thing is referred to
be a resource in economics, it has to have four characteristics. These are-

1. Utility: Utility means the capability of any goods/products to fulfill the need
of people. If any goods is to become a resource, it must have the capability to
create utility. People do not buy anything with money that does not have any
utility.

2. Insufficiency: To become a resource, the quantity and supply of any goods
will be limited. For example, the supplies of river water, wind are ample.
These are not resources. But if water is bottled in a factory, 1t becomes a
resource. On the other hand, land, gas, instruments are not amply available.
That means, these things are resources and these things are the insufficient
goods for us.

3. Transferrable/Exchangeable: Another characteristic of resource is its
transferability. It means the resource can be transferred to or handed over to
another person. In other words, if the ownership of goods is transferable or
changeable it is called a resource. The talent of the world famous poet
Rabindranath Tagore cannot be considered as resource in economic terms.
Because, the ownership of his brilliance cannot be handed over or exchanged
whereas the ownership of a television is changeable, which makes a TV a
resource.

4. Externality: Those things that stand for the internal qualities of human
beings are not resources in econoraic terms. Because we cannot feel their

2023
2025

The Important Ideas of Economics 21

existence externally. For example: the special experience or knowledge of
a person about computer or the qualities of someone's character cannot be
termed as resources. But in the capitalist market economy, these human
qualities can be turned into saleable resources.

Classification of Resources:
Resources are of three kinds from the perspective of their origins. They are-

1, Natural Resources: Goods obtained from nature which satisfy people's
needs, are known as natural resources. For example, land, forests, mineral
resources, rivers, etc.

2. Human Resources: Different kinds of abilities and skills of a human are
known as human resources. For example, physical capabilities, intelligence,
enterprise, organizational capacities are human resources.

3. Produced Resources: Resources that are created utilizing natural and human
resources are known as produced resources. For example, raw materials,
instruments, industries, transport and communication systems, educational
institutions and health care centres, etc. are built by humans, so they are
produced resources.

Task: Explain logically which of the following are resources in terms of
economics:

Wheat, rice, genius of a poet, experience with the computer, and sand of
rivers,

Description of the Economic Resources of Bangladesh

Bangladesh is one of the developing countries in the world. The economic
resources of a country are very closely related to the development of the
country. The description of the economic resources of our country is given
below:

A. Agricultural Resources

Bangladesh is an agriculture-based country. Fertile agricultural lands rich in
alluvial soil occupy vast areas of this country. The fertility of our lands,
favourable weather, rainfall, rivers, etc are supportive of agricultural
22 Economics

production, There is about 90,990 square km of tillable agricultural land in our
country. In our agricultural lands, rice, wheat, dal, potato, oil-seed, fruits and
other crops and jule, sugarcane, tea, tobacco, silk and other cash crops are
produced. Almost 63% of our population is directly or indirectly dependent
on agriculture. About 13.35% of our national income (GDP) comes from the
agriculture sector in our country.

B. Mineral Resources

Bangladesh is not rich in mineral resources. The minerals that have been
discovered here so far are briefly described below:

1. Natural Gas: The main mineral resource of Banglacesh is natural gas,
According to the Bangladesh Economic Review- 2020, 28 gas fields have
been discovered in the country till 2020. There, about 39.80 trillion cubic foot
gas is in reserve in total. The producing gas fields are: Bakhorabad, Hobigonj,
Kailashtila, Roshidpur, Sylhet, Titas, Belabo (Narshmgdi). Meghna, Shahbajpur.
Semutan, Sundalpur, Shrikail, Begumganj, Rupganj, Salda river, Jalalabad,
Bianibazar, Fenchuganj, Moulovibazar, Feni, Bibiana, and Bangura, etc. This
gas is used as raw material to produce chemical fertilizers. Besides, this gas
is used as fuel in electricity plants, industries and households.

2. Limestone: Limestone is used in producing cement, glass, paper, soap,
bleaching powder, etc. There are reserves of limestones in Bhangarhat of
Sylhet, Baglibazar, Tekerhat of Sunamgonj, Jamalgonj of Jaipurhat and St.
Martin island of Chattogram in Bangladesh.

3. China clay: There are reserves of china clay in Netrokona, Mymensingh,
Sherpur, Hobiganj, Moulovibazar and Chattogram districts. It is used in
making utensils and sanitary products.

4, Coal: Coal has been discovered in Sylhet, Rajshahi, Jaipurhat, Faridpur, and
Boro Pukuria of Dinajpur in Bangladesh. Recently coal is being extracted
from Boro Pukuria of Dinajpur.

5. Hardrock: There are stores of hardrock at Moddhopara of Dinajpur and
Ranipukur of Rangpur districts. The construction of roads, railways, dams,
etc. needs this stone.

2025
2025

The Important Ideas of Economics 23

6. Silica Sand: There are reserves of silica sands in Sylhet, Chattogram, Cumilla
and Jamalpur. It is used in producing glass, colour, and other chemicals.

7. Sulphur: Sulphur is used in producing gunpowder, at match factories, for oil
refining and in some other sectors. There is a possibility of getting
sulphur at Kutubdia Island in Chattogram.

8. Mineral Oil: Mineral oil has been found at Horipur in Sylhet. At the coastal
regions of the country, Chattogram Hill Tracts, and in Sylhet, mineral oil is
being searched for.

9. Bronze: A little quantity of bronze has been found at Ranipukur and Pirgon)
of Rangpur district and at the layers of hardrock at Moddhopara of Dinajpur.
Bronze is used for making electric goods and wire, coms, etc.

C. Forest Resources

Forestry and forest resources are very important natural resources. To keep the
natural and environmental condition well, at least 25% of the total land of any
country should be forests. But the forest-land is only 11.10% of the total land of
Bangladesh which is less, compared to the other countries. For example, there
are 33.84% forests in the United States, 67% in Japan, 63% in Mayanmar and 23.70%
in India. There are different types of forest in Bangladesh. The entire forest
region of Bangladesh can be divided into five parts:

D. Animal Resources

Everywhere in Bangladesh, different kinds of animals and birds are found.
Among the domestic animals, cow, goat, sheep, buffalo, duck, chicken, etc. are
the main. Besides, in the Sundarbans and forests of Chattogram Hill Tracts there
are tigers, elephants, deer, and some other valuable animals and numerous kinds
of birds. Various kinds of fishes are found in our rivers, lakes and marshes (haor)
and ponds in the Bay of Bengal. These kinds of resources meet our
nutritional demands. They create employment opportunities. They provide
raw-materials to leather industries. These resources are helpful to increase
export earnings.
24

Economics

The following table shows the types of forest, their locations and main trees.

The amount of
Serial No.| Type of forest) forest (Thousands! District location Main trees
hector)
Chattogram, Garjon, Chapalish,
Chattogram Hill Dhakijam, Civit,
1. Mountain 1377.00 Tracts, Cox’s Bazar, Segun, Gamar,
forest Sylhet, Champa, Jarul,
Moulovibazar and Sonalu
Habiganj
7. Natural 610.00 Khulna, Bagerhat Sundori, Geoa,
mangrove and Satkhira Kewra. Poshur, Bain,
forest Goran
Noakhali,
4 Created 200.00 Laksmipur, Bhola, Geoa, Bain
mangrove Patuakhali,
forest Chattogram and
Cox’s Bazar
Gazipur, Tangail,
Mymensingch, 4 og
4. |Shawl forest) 120.00 | Dinajpur, Rangpur, | Shaw! or Gajari
Naogaon,
Thakurgaon and
Panchgarh
Sylhet and Hijal, Koroch,
5. Wetlands 23.00 one nian rite Baran

Sources: Directorate of Forest

E. Energy Resources

The use of the power resources is a must in factones, transport and
communication, mechanized cultivation, households etc. There are some
sources from which energy resources are obtained. These are coal, mineral oil,
natural gas, water, atomic energy, solar energy, and the different types of
prevailing fuels.

Although coal has been found at some places in Bangladesh, the extracting has
not yet begun. Petroleum has been found at Haripur in Sylhet. The necessary
quantity of petroleum is imported from the foreign countries. Ii has not yet been
possible to begin producing atomic and solar energies in the country.

20125
The Important Ideas of Economics 25

The supply of energy in Bangladesh comes mostly from natural gas, electricity
and some other traditional ingredients. We use natural gas in the factories, for
household work and for producing electricity. Electricity is produced from
water in this country. It is known as hydroelectricity. The only hydroelectricity
production plant of the country is situated at Kaptai in the Chattogram Hill
Tracts, by the bank of the river Karnafuli. The electricity that is produced by
gas, oil and coal, is known as thermal electricity. In the electricity production
plants in Bangladesh that are listed below, mineral oil is used as fuel:

1. Goalpara thermal power centre, Khulna
2.  Veramara thermal power centre, Kushtia
3. Thakurgaon thermal power centre

4, Saidpur thermal power centre, Nilfamari

The gas-run electricity production centres of this country are:
Shiddhirgonj thermal power centre, Narayangonj
Ashugonj thermal power centre, Brahmanbaria

I

2.

3. Ghorashal thermal power centre, Narshingdi
4. Shahjibazar thermal power centre, Sylhet

5

Chattogram thermal power centre

Heat energy is produced in this country from various existing fuels like wood,
hay, dung, jute-stalks, husk leaves etc. The present government has set up the
scheme of supplying electricity by quick rental service.

It is worth mentioning that, nowadays, air current, solar heat, and organic gas
are being used in many countries as materials for producing energy. In the
modern world, atomic energy is given much importance, too. It can be expected
that in near future, energy production will be attempted from these sources in
Bangladesh as well.

F. Water Resources

Water is a basic natural resource which is a nvust for the survival of animals and
plants. Water resource is necessary for the existence and development of the

Forma-4, Economics Class 9-10
26 Economics

agriculture, forestry, animal, and energy resources of the country. There are
mainly three sources of water resources in Bangladesh. They are: 1. rivers, lakes
and marshes, ponds and the sea, 2. rainfall, and 3. underground water. The water
from these three sources is important for our agriculture. Cultivation is
hampered if the supply of water is either less or more. In the internal water
reservoirs and the sea, there are fishes and other aquatic resources.
Hydroelectricity is produced from the river current. Centering the numerous
rivers and marshes and other water reservoirs, the transport system and trading
have been developed in this country. River water and rainfall create positive
impact upon the weather and environment of the country. If the development of
water resource and its proper usage is ensured, our economic development will
surely gain pace. [Source: Bangladesh Economic Review-2016]

2.2 Goods

By goods, we only understand material possessions. However, there are many
goods in reality which, though non-material (e.g. light, wind, etc), are goods in
terms of economics. Therefore, we call all material and non-material things that
have the capability to fulfil human needs are goods. That is, the thing that has
utility is goods.

Freely Accessible Goods: The goods that can be obtained without money are
known as free-access goods. These goods are freely available in the nature and
their supply is unlimited, e.g. light, wind, river water, ete.

Economic Goods: The goods for which people have to pay are known as

economic goods. Their supply is limited. e.g. foods, clothes, books, pens,
chairs, tables, etc.

Consumer Goods: The utility of goods which is consumed by consumption or
use, are called consumer goods, i.e. car, clothes, etc.

Permanently Consumable Goods: The goods that can be consumed over a
long period of time are termed as permanently consumable goods.
e.g. refrigerator, car, house, land, playground, etc.

2023
2025

The Important Ideas of Economics 27

Temporarily Consumable Goods: The goods that are to be consumed within
a short period of time and sometimes can be consumed for once only are known
as temporarily consumable goods, e.g. food, clothes, vegetables, etc.

Intermediate Goods: Some produced goods that are not to be used for direct
consumption, rather used as factors of production, are known as intermediate
zoods. Intermediate goods are consumed at final production. For example, raw
materials, milk and sugar used for preparing sweets. These raw materials,
milk and sugar are intermediate goods.

Final Goods: The produced goods that are used for direct consumption after
their production are known as final goods, i.e. a loaf, a chair, ete.

Capital Goods: The produced goods that are used for the production of other
goods, are known as capital goods, e.g. instruments, factories, warehouses, etc.
Capital goods are used again and again in production. Capital goods can be used
to produce other capital goods.

Goods & Commodity: In economics, product means the factors that are used to
produce final goods, For example: ‘Ata’ is a product which is used to produce
final production of bread. Traditionally corns, gold, oil and natural gas are
considered as products, All the goods are not commodity but all economic goods
are commodity. All services are not commodity but all economic services are
commodity.

Task: Mention which goods are of which kind- light, rivers water. tables,
land, ornaments, instruments, thread.

2.3 Opportunity Cost and Choice

Opportunity Cost: One highly used concept in economics is ‘opportunity cost’.
Suppose, you are a student. Can you do everything every day? For example, you
cannot take the economics examination and watch a cricket match at the field at
the same time. If you are choosing to do one task it will obviously not be possible
for you to do the other one. Let us take another example, suppose you have |
acre of land. If rice is cultivated here, 20 quintals of rice can be produced in
this land. If you want to cultivate jute on that land, it would be possible to
28 Economics

produce 10 quintals of jute there. In this case, the opportunity cost of 20 quintals
of rice is 10 quintals of jute. Briefly speaking, to obtain something, another has
to be sacrificed- the sacrificed quantity is the opportunity cost of the other
goods. Generally, the highest opportunity cost is considered as the opportunity
cost in the economy.

The concept of opportunity cost can be explained through production possibility
curve.

Suppose a country can produce the below assembly of rice and jute using all its
resources and prevalent technology.

Assembly | Paddy (million ton) | Jute (million ton) | Opportunity cost of | Million Paddy
a. 0 15 -
b ] 14 |
c 2 12 2
d 3 9 3
é 4 a 4
f. a 0 5

The diagram below can be drawn following the chart.
v
Jute
(million ton)
ta Sach production possibitity curve
7
12-
5.
1 fo: 4
3- 1 ! ! |
| I |
| I I |
0 — — >
1 2 3 4 5. Paddy (million ton)

The diagram above is a production possibitity curve. If you go from dot a to
other dot, if you want to increase the production of other goods you have to

2023
2025

The Important Ideas of Economics 29

decrease the production of other goods. For example: if you go from ‘c’ to ‘d’
dot, to increase one unit of paddy, you have to decrease 3 units of jute. That
means the opportunity cost of one million ton of paddy is 3 million bale of jute.

Choice: Jasim is a farmer. He has a land of three bighas. He can cultivate paddy
or wheat in that total land. Besides, he can cultivate paddy in one parts of the
land and wheat in other part. [fhe cultivates only paddy in that land, 120 quintals
paddy can be produced. Again, if he cultivates only wheat, $0 quintal wheat can
be produced. Now he can decide what he will cultivate in the land. This process
of taking decision for the production of crops is choice. In economics, choice is
done because of the scarcitics of resources. It happens due to the scarcities of
resources at personal level as well as in social and public sectors.

Task; Mention two examples regarding opportunity cost from the real life.

2.4 Income, Saving and Investment

Income: For using a factor of production, the money that the factor or its
owner gets in a fixed period of time is known as income. The income obtained
for labour is known as wage. Income obtained for land is called rent. The owner
of the capital is given interest for the use of his capital and this interest is also his
income. The income that an entrepreneur earns by mecting all his expenditures
is called profit.

Saving: People earn for consumption. Thinking of the future, people do not
consume the whole of the earned income of the present. They keep a portion
of that income in some economic institution. This portion that is keptis known
as saving. Say for example, your father gets a salary of ten thousand taka in one
month. He spends nine thousand for your family. Here, your father saves one
thousand taka. This concept of saving can be shown by an equation, e.g.
S=Y-C (when Y>C)

= 10,000 - 9,000

= 1,000
Here, S = saving, Y = income, C = consumption cost

Consumption
Cost (2)

Incorne

. ; : : ()
The summation of income, savings and consumption can be

shown through this pie chart.
30 Economics

An individual's saving usually depends upon the quantity of income,
responsibility towards the family, farsightedness, social security and the rate of
interest.

Investment: People save from their income. When the saved money is
utilized for enhancing production, it is known to be investment. For example,
there are capital goods of one lakh taka in a factory at a particular time. To
increase production, capital goods of another fifty thousand taka are bought.
This extra fifty thousand taka is the investment. Through investment, the
quantity of production rises and economic development is possible.

Task: Refer to at least four sectors where investment brings about economic

development.

2.5 Economic Activities and Non-Economic Activities

For survival, people perform various activities. The main purpose of these
activities is to earn a living. For a living, some people work at factories, some at
offices, and some on lands. Apart from earning a living, people also perform
activities like playing, entertainment or rearing children. And some others get
involved in anti-social activities. All of these activities referred above are not
to be termed as economic activities. We will divide these activities into two
parts, e.g. a) economic activities, b) non-economic activities.

a) Economic Activities

To earn a living, the activities done by people are known as economic activities.
By economic activities, people eam money and spend that for survival, e.g. the
labourers work at the factories, farmers work on the lands, doctors treat the
patients, industrialists run the industries, all these are economic activities. The
basic inspiration of people for their economic activities is to fulfil their needs of
goods,

b) Non-Economic Activities

The activities which do not generate income and cannot be spent for the survival
are known as non-economic activities. These activities, though they fulfil some

2025
2025

The Important Ideas of Economics 31

of the needs of humans, do not play a role in earning money, e.g. the rearing of
children by the parents, playing as persuing a hobby etc. are the examples of
non-economic activities.

2.6 Economic Activities of Bangladesh

Bangladesh is a developing country of South Asia, The economy of this country
depends on 3  sectors— agriculture, industry and service. However, the
contribution from the industrial sector and service sector is increasing gradually
in national income. And the contribution of agriculture in national income is
decreasing gradually.

Agriculture Related Economic Activities: From the employment point of view
of Bangladesh, agriculture is known as the largest sector now. 50% of the
labour force is employed in this sector. Almost 75% of the total population is
directly or indirectly related to agriculture. Cultivating the lands, sowing,
irrigation, giving fertilizer, spreading insecticides, harvesting the crops, selling
the crops, livestock farming, pisciculture, fishing, poultry, producing various
types of vegetables and fruits, and selling them all are included in the
agricultural sector.

Industry related economic activities: After agriculture, industry is the largest
economic sector of Bangladesh. The main indusiries of Bangladesh are:
Readymade garments, cloths, jute, cotton, tea processing, paper and newsprint,
cement, chemical fertilizer, frozen fish, light engineering etc. The major part of
human labour are engaged with garment industries. Garment industries
contribute 75-80% earning of foreign currency in Bangladesh.

Service Sector: The importance of service sector is increasing in line with the
economic development of Bangladesh. In this sector maintenance and repairs,
training and counsultancy are included. The services that are included here are
houschold management, tourism, nursing, teaching ete. Besides, many people
are engaged as Tailor, Blacksmith, Goldsmith, Mechanic, Weaver, Wood Cutter
and Hawker.
32 Economics

Task: Prepare a list of 10 agriculture based economic activities and 10

economic activities beyond agricultural activities of the people of
Bangladesh.

[The source of all information in this chapter Bangladesh Economic Review-2020]

Exercise
Short Questions
1. What are the characteristics of resources?
2. Refer to the classification of resources.

What are goods?

Reler to the classification of goods.
What is opportunity cost?

Define income.

What is a saving?

What is meant by investment?

See ae FE &

What are economic activities?

10. What is meant by non-economic activities?

Descriptive Questions

Give a brief description of the economic resources of Bangladesh.
Describe the mineral resources of Bangladesh.

Illustrate opportunity cost and choice with a diagram.

Explain the economic activities of the people of Bangladesh.

Boh

Multiple-Choice Questions

|. Which of the following is natural resource?

a. ahouse b. a post-office

ce. the river Padma c. the Bay of Bengal

20125
The Important Ideas of Economics 33

2. Goodwill is the wealth of business, Because
i. ithas the capability to satisfy wants.
ii, its ownership can be changed,
ili. collective ownership can be seen.
Which of the following is correct?
a. i b, i and ii
c. ii and iii di, ii and iii
Read the following passage and answer question numbers 3 and 4.
Rahela has a sewing machine. She earns monthly Tk. 10,000/- from it. After
maintaining the family and the education costs of her children, she saves the rest
of the money. From that savings money, this year she has bought another sewing
machine.
3. In economic terms, what can we call Rahela's buying of the new sewing machine?
a. saving b. capital
¢. investment d. opportunity cost
4, By the last activity of Rahela
i. family security will be enhanced.
ii, responsibility towards the children wall be increased.
iii. employment will grow.
Which of the following is correct?
a. i b. i and il
c. ii and iii d. i and iii
Creative Questions
1, Some guests came to Shafiq's house. His mother gave him tk 1000/- and sent
him to the market to buy some fish and meat. At the market he found that with

that money he can buy 2 kg of fish and 4 kg of meat. Thinking a bit, he bought
1 kg fish and 2 ke meat.

a. What is income?

b. What is meant by power resource?

c. Illustrate the idea of Shafiq's buying fish and meat, presenting it in a diagram.

d. Analyze the economic significance of Shalig's choosing the two goods.
Forma-5, Economics Class 9-10
34 Economics

2. Hafiz can imspire any person very easily with his words. He has unlimited
capacity of organizing people. He has a room at Sadarghat for the
storing of goods that come from different parts of the country. From here,
his employees supply goods to different parts of the country according to
his wall.

a. What are economic goods?

b. What are natural resources?

c. What type of economic goods is in Hafiz's room at Sadarghat? Explain.
d

Are Hafiz's qualities resources? Give reasons for your answer.

2025
