2025

Chapter Eight
Reflection of Light

When light reflects on the objects around us and comes into our eyes, we can see
those objects. In the previous chapter we have learned about sound as a wave. In
this chapter we will learn about light as a wave. This wave is a different kind of
wave, called an electromagnetic wave.

When light is reflected on a plane mirror, it creates an image. All of us are
familiar with this image. Ifa curved mirror is used instead of plane mirror, it will
create a different kind of image. We will discuss different types of images in
different mirrors in this chapter.
212 Physics

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

e explain the nature of light.

e _ explain the laws of reflection of light.

e ~—_ explain mirrors.

e explain images.

e explain the formation of images in mirrors by drawing action line of
light rays.

e explain some common phenomena of formation of images in mirrors.

e _ explain uses of mirrors.

e ~— explain magnification.

e demonstrate formation of images.

e understand the influence of different optical phenomena and their

contributions in our life.

2025
2025

Reflection of Light 213

8.1. Nature of Light

What we see with our eyes is light. We see trees, the sky, chairs and tables,
human beings, but that doesn't mean that these are light. Light reflects from
these objects and comes into our eyes, and the retina of our eyes creates and
sends signals to our brain. Then our brain can recognize whether it is a tree or a
human being. The whole process starts with light entering into our eyes.

Wavelength (m)
10" 10 40° 10° 10 10

JOLARNT

ah
SARM O1DTY —
SABM OIPey
|

Visible light

—-
[=]

2
oo

0.6

Sensitivity of eyes

o 2
BR

0
400 500 600 700
Wavelength (nm)

Figure 8.01: Spectrum of light and sensitivity of eyes to different colors

Light is an electromagnetic and periodic wave. Every periodic wave has a wavelength,
which means light also has a wavelength. Those of us who have produced waves by
throwing a stone in a pond or by shaking a rope know that we can create waves of
different wavelengths if we desire. So light may have different wavelengths.
Electromagnetic waves may have any wavelengths.

These wavelengths may be greater than a few kilometers or may be one trillionth parts
of one meter.(1trillion=10"") We can only see a small part of this large range of this.
214 Physics

We cannot see it if the wavelength is larger or smaller than this range. If the wavelength
is from 400 nm to 700 nm, we can see the electromagnetic wave, and we call that light.
The colors we see in our eyes are actually lights of different wavelengths. When the
wavelength is less, it becomes violet. When the wavelength increases, the light
gradually becomes blue, green, yellow, orange, and red, and at one point it disappears!
Human eyes cannot see beyond this range- but various insects or other living beings
can see outside this range. The sensitivity of human eyes to different colors of light is
shown in Figure 8.1.

@) Do Yourself

Hold a CD in the sunlight and reflect the light on a nearby wall. You can see
the full spectrum of light on the wall. CDs have sharp indentations which
work as grating and separate the colors.

In Figure 8.01, the name of different wavelengths is shown. If the wavelength is
less than the smallest wavelength of visible light, then we call it ultraviolet light.
If the wavelength is even smaller than it is called x-ray, and even smaller is
called gamma ray- which comes out from radioactive nucleus. If the wavelength
is larger than the largest wavelength of visible light, we call it an infrared ray. If
it gradually becomes larger we call them microwave, and then radio waves! To
learn physics this division of wavelengths is one of the most important topics.

@) Do Yourself

We cannot see infrared rays with naked eyes because of their high
wavelengths. A TV remote emits infrared rays that we cannot see. You may
see this through mobile phone camera because a special type of light sensitive
IC named CCD is used, which can detect some infrared light with visible
light.

2025
2025

Reflection of Light 215

You can see that the wavelengths of visible light are very short but there are
many interesting experiments in physics, using these we can observe various
properties of this wavelength.

If we want to know more about light, we can start with reflection.

8.2. Reflection

If we talk about reflection what we
imagine is standing in front of a

mirror, but reflection is much absorption
more than that. When light is reflection ee
sent from one medium to another, fefraction

three different phenomena occur
simultaneously. One of them is
reflection and the other two are

refraction and absorption. (Figure first medium second medium
8.02)

While traversing from the first
medium into the second medium, if
: another.

a part of light returns to the first

medium, the phenomenon is called reflection. Some parts of it may enter the
second medium which is called refraction and some of it may be absorbed which
is called absorption. In this chapter we will discuss reflection and in the next
chapter we will discuss refraction.

Figure 8.02: Reflection, refraction and
absorption of light from one medium to

It has been said earlier that light is a wave. Generally a wave needs a medium to
travel, (If there is no water how will a wave be created in it). But this is different
in case of light. As this is a wave consisting of electric and magnetic fields, so
light does not need any medium to travel. Light can create its wave of electric
and magnetic fields and can propagate by itself. So when we talked about the
first and second medium for reflection or refraction, one of this medium can
even be vacuum. To speak the truth, the examples we see for reflection and
refraction in glass or water, there, one medium is glass (or water) and other is air.
Air is such a light medium that we can consider it as a vacuum.
216 Physics

8.2.1 Laws of Reflection

Before understanding the laws of reflection, we need to define some terms.
When lights incident from one medium to another, for the time being we assume
that it is a plane surface. To understand better, we will assume that the light that
reflects is a light ray or a light beam. When a light ray from the first medium
to the second medium is incident on a point, first we have to imagine a
perpendicular at that point which is called a normal. Then imagine a plane that
contains this incident ray and the normal (Figure 8.03).

The ray, which is incident at a point,
from the first to the second medium
is called the incident ray (XO). The
ray which is reflected (OX’) is called
the reflected ray. (You are realizing
that the ray which enters the second
medium is the refracted ray- we will
not discuss it in this chapter). The
angle between the incident ray and
the normal is called the incident
angle (0,) and the angle between the
reflected ray and the normal is the Figur 8.03: Reflection of light from first to
reflected angle (0). Now we can second medium

state the two laws of reflection:

first medium

second medium

First Law: The reflected ray will be in the plane which we imagined
through the incident ray and the normal.

Second Law: The reflected angle is equal to the incident angle.

Example

Question: Two mirrors are placed as shown in figure 8.04. A candle is placed at
point X between the mirrors. Where image of the candle will be formed?

2025
Reflection of Light 217

Answer: The image will be seen in the mirror. An image of that image will be
seen eventually in two mirrors. Therefore, as shown in the figure, an infinite
number of images will be formed.

mirror

jl 6.
d, hm fi i d, is us
+a x' d, d, Pa x"
Figure 8.04: If a candle is placed between two parallel mirrors, the image
X’ and image of image X’ i.e. X”, X’"...will be formed.

——
—,
—

Here two laws of reflection have been stated. But everything about reflection is
not yet discussed. The most important matter has not been discussed yet, that is
how much will it reflect? If a mirror is used for reflection, it reflects fully. But
the word reflection is not only meant for mirrors, it may occur between any two
mediums. Fresnel's law describes how much it will reflect. You will learn more
about it in higher classes. The main thing is, the larger the angle of incidence, the
more the amount of reflection (Figure 8.05). In normal glass, light is reflected
slightly ( only 4-5% ), and the rest is refracted through the glass. But if the angle
of incidence is higher (like 80° or 90°,) then reflected light increases greatly. You
can test it standing beside a window.

Figure 8.05: Reflection increases for higher incident angle

Forma-28, Physics, Class 9-10
218 Physics

Absorption

Much of the beauty of the world around us comes from different colors. But how
does the color appear? Why is the color of a rose red and a leaf green? You will be
even more surprised to see a red rose as black under green light or a green leaf as
black under red light!

This is actually very easy
to explain; in visible light
(sometimes called white light) pie (all colors)
every wavelength is present. Since \ red
colors depend on the wavelength WA Ys
of light, it can be said that light of Ya oa
all colors are present there. When
all colors are present together, then
individual colors are not seen
separately- then we say the light is
colorless or white light. When this
light falls upon a red rose, then the

rose absorbs all the colors except

red. The light that reflects and Figure 8.06: Absorbing all colors which
colour is reflected by an object that is

considered its color.

come to our eyes, only has red and
we see the rose appears as red.
Similarly, when light of all colors falls upon a green leaf, it reflects only green
light and absorbs others, so we see the color of the leaf as green. (Figure 8.06)

If the rose and leaf are seen under full red light then the flower will appear red as
it does not absorb red color but the leaf will appear black. Because the leaf
will absorb the color red and will not reflect any color. So we will see the leaf as
black. Similarly, under green light we will see the leaf green but the rose black.
Because the red rose will absorb the green light totally and no light will be
reflected from the rose, so it looks black.

2025
2025

Reflection of Light 219
8.2.3 Reflection from smooth and rough planes

Parallel light rays become parallel after reflecting from mirrors or smooth plane
surfaces because each ray obeys the law of reflection and reflects with an angle
of reflection equal to the angle of incidence. Even if the plane is not smooth,
every ray of light will obey the law of reflection. But the rays are incident at
different angles at different points of the plane, therefore the rays will reflect in
different angles after reflection. After reflection, the reflected rays are not
parallel and spread in different directions. (Figure 8.07) These types of
reflections are called irregular reflection.

WY

Figure 8.07: Light reflects from smooth surfaces and scatters from rough surfaces

8.3 Mirror

All of us have seen mirrors. In a mirror a
clear image is formed due to uniform
reflection. A metal layer is placed behind a
glass mirror for proper reflection. 4% light
is reflected from the front part of a mirror,
but the back part reflects fully and forms
the original image. When the original
image is very important in optical
instruments like telescopes, the silver or
aluminum layer is coated on the glass B
surface, so that the two images, one 4%
lighter and other 96% clear are not formed,
rather it forms a 100% clear image.

Figure 8.08: The image of X
object will form in X’ position.
220 Physics

8.3.1 Image

When you stand in front of a mirror, you see your own image. The closer you
stand; the image seems to appear at the same distance behind the mirror. In
figure 8.08, X is an object from which three rays have been reflected in mirror
AB (therefore, incident angle = reflected angle). If we extend the rays behind the
mitror it will seem to converge to a point X’. This point is the image of object X.
For a real object, there are infinite number of points and each point forms an
image and collectively makes the image of the object.

If we want to define the position of the image using geometry we need to draw
at least two rays. It will be easier to draw the picture if we consider XP (normal
to the plane) and XO as ray as shown in figure 8.09. Triangle OPX and OPX’ are
congruent. Therefore XP = X’P, which means the image has formed at a distance
equal to the distance of the object from the mirror.

Example

Question: Show that, triangle OPX
and OPX’ are congruent.

Answer: Here, ZXPO = ZX'PO
because both of them are at right
angles, as XP is normal to the plane.
According to the law of reflection,
incident angle is equal to angle of
reflection, therefore, 7XOP =ZROA.
Again ZROA =Z X’OP. B
Therefore, between triangle OPX and
OPX’, OP is the common arm and two
angles on both sides are equal. So,

triangles are congruent
Therefore, XP = X'P of the object at position X

Figure 8.09: Two light rays XP and
XO are sufficient to draw an image

The image we see in a mirror is not actually real even though it seems real. This
is because light is not actually coming from the place it appears to be coming.

2025
2025

Reflection of Light 221

Later, we will see that sometimes images are really formed by converging light
and light rays come from there. This type of image is called a real image and it
is possible to do many things with this type of image. In case of the image
formed in a mirror, light does not actually come from the image, so this is virtual
image.

Figure 8.10, shows how an image is formed for an extended object
instead of a single point. Light coming from points X and Y reflect from the
mirror and form a virtual images at point X’ and Y’ respectively, light appears
to be coming from X’ and Y'. You can clearly see that length of XY is equal to
the length X’Y’. If the arrow head of XY is on top, the arrow head of X’Y' will
also be on the top.

So the image in a mirror is: x"
(a) Equidistant from the mirror _ ;
(b) Virtual ge
(c) Straight and er
(d) Equal to the size of the object Y’

Figure 8.10: XY object’s imagex'Y'
We are reminding these separately, because later we will find that if we use
mirrors of other types instead of plane mirrors, the image may form at different
distances, may be real, may be inverted, may even be small or large.

@) Do yourself

Figure 8.11: Kaleidoscope can be made using three glass pieces.
222 Physics

(Take three pieces of glass of similar size (you can find this from photo-frame)
stores). Form a triangular shape with these three pieces and wrap them with
paper. Stick them in a triangular shape with glue as shown in Figure 8.11.
Cover one side with thin paper. Now put some colorful stones or colored
beads or pieces of bangles inside it and look from the other side. You will see
some beautiful patterns. This setup is called a kaleidoscope. If you rotate this
instrument, you will see the patterns in movement. Continuous reflections on
the glass create this pattern. You may think that in normal transparent glass
the reflection is less, but in a kaleidoscope the incident angle is larger,
therefore the amount of reflection is also higher.

Ne /

v
a | Example

Question: What is the required
length of a mirror to see a
full-length image?

Answer: From the geometry
shown in Figure 8.12, it can be
said that the length of the mirror
is 0.75 meter. The interesting
thing is that, whether you stand at
a distance of 1 m or 10 m from the
mirror, the size of the mirror
needs to be half of the length of
you for you to see your whole Figure 8.12: To see the full image it is not
body. If your mother or father or necessary of a full length mirror.
anyone wants to buy a full-length

plane mirror, you may suggest

them to buy a half-length plane mirror!

2025
2025

Reflection of Light 223

Question: Two mirrors are placed mutually at 60°
angle (Figure 8.13). If light is incident on the first
mirror at an angle of 60°, what will be the direction
of light?

Answer: From geometry it can be said that
the ray will incident on the point B

perpendicularly, and reflect in the opposite Figure 8.13: Two mirrors kept at
direction. an angle of 60°, light is incident at

@) Individual work

point A on a mirror at an angle 60°.

25 |
Figure 8.14: Image of an object can be formed using fine holes.

In a dark room, make a very small hole in the middle of a piece of
cardboard and place a candle before it. On the opposite side of the board,
hold a white paper, as shown in Figure 8.14. If you do not allow any other
light to fall on the white paper, you will see an image of the flame of the
candle. By moving the white paper in forward or backward, the size of
the image can be made small or big. Is the image real or virtual? Straight
or inverted? Is it equidistant or not? Large or small?

You can understand, the image is real, inverted, clear at all distances and
as far as it forms, larger in size. Through this process, a pin hole camera
is made.

224 Physics

Example

Question: As shown in Figure 8.15, two
mirrors AO and BO are placed
perpendicularly to each other. Hold your left
hand in front of it. Now draw the images of

your hand.
Answer: Your hand is in AOB. In A'OB is

the front-back image of your hand. In AOB'
is the up-down image of your hand. Notice
that in both cases your left hand image

appears to be your right hand. In A'OB! you Figure 8.15: Different reflections

will see the image of the image. of the left hand grip in two mirrors
kept perpendicularly

This can be the up-down image of A'OB or can be the front-back image of AOB'.
Notice that after one reflection your left hand seems to be your right hand, but
after two reflections (reflection of the reflection) your left hand appears as your
left hand.

8.4 Spherical Mirror

We all have seen ordinary plain mirrors but
may not have seen a real spherical mirror. But
the main concept of a spherical mirror can be
seen in a new shiny spoon. Spherical mirrors
are of two types- concave and convex. We can
make concave or convex mirrors by cutting a
portion of a hollow sphere and coating its
surface with a silver or aluminium layer.
Whether the spherical mirror will be concave
or convex depends on which surface is coated Figure 8.16: The opposite plane

with silver or aluminium. of a spoon works as convex
mMurror.

2025
Reflection of Light 225

8.5 Convex Mirror

An actual convex mirror is a part of a real sphere. Let, the radius of the sphere
be r (Figure 8.17). A part of it has been cut to make provision for reflection of
light from the convex side.

If a parallel light beam is incident on the mirror, the light will scatter in all
directions. If we extend the scattered light rays towards the center of the mirror,
it will seem like they have come from a point. This point is called the focal point.
The center point of the surface of a convex mirror that reflects the light is called
pole and the distance of the focal point from the pole is called the focal

length (f).

We can imagine a spherical mirror as a part of a sphere. If the radius of this
sphere is 1, its focal length would be = 1/2 .

focal
length.

—_>

a

2 ew

7 Se I
point™-.| | ~

r

pole

Figure 8.17: Focal length of a convex mirror is half of the radius of the sphere.

Example

Question: Prove that, f= 1/2

Answer: Interestingly, you cannot prove this completely. You can only go close
to it. Let two rays parallel with the principal axis of a spherical mirror

Forma-29, Physics, Class 9-10
226 Physics

come from A and B respectively. The first ray has come to point X and the
second one has come to another point Y. The ray coming to point X will be
reflected back the way it has come. Let us extend this ray to the center of the
sphere, O. We can see that OX=r (radius of the sphere). The ray coming from
point B to point Y will create an angle of incidence Oiwith perpendicular
ON at that point. The angle of
reflection of the ray BY is 0,and it will
be reflected towards YP. If we extend
PY, it would intersect line OX at point
F.

FO=FY because in the triangle OFY,
ZFOY=ZOYF , as FOY= 0; and
ZFYO= 6...

FY = FX when XY is small compared

to radius r. This is true for most
convex mirrors. is a small part of a hollow sphere.

So, FO=FY=FX= 1/2
or focal length f= 1/2

Figure 8.18: A spherical convex mirror

Question: If a plane mirror is considered a spherical convex mirror then
what is its focal length?
Answer: Infinite.

We will now see how the image is formed for a spherical mirror. You will see
that in a convex spherical mirror, images are always virtual where as in a
spherical concave mirror it may be both real or virtual, depending on the position
of the object.

8.5.1 Image in a Spherical Convex Mirror

We have already said that the outer part of a spoon acts as a spherical convex
mirror. You can see an upright and small image of yourself there. This means
that the image in a convex mirror should always be small.

2025
2025

Reflection of Light 227

To understand how an image is formed in a spherical convex mirror, we first need
to understand how light rays reflect on such a mirror. This depends on what
angle the light rays are incident on the mirror. If we know the rules of reflection
of only three special light rays, we can easily explain how an image is formed:

Gi) If light rays are travelling towards the center (Figure 8.19, XN or YR ray),
they are reflected perpendicularly and go back along the line they were as
incident on.

(ii) If light rays travel parallel to the principal axis (Figure 8.19, XP), they will

appear to have diverged from the focal (F) point.

(iii) If the direction of the light ray is changed, it goes back the way it has

come. When the light ray is travelling towards the focus (Figure 8.19, QP),
it will be reflected parallel to principal axis (PX).

We can now create an image using these three rules. In figure 8.19, an object XY
is kept in front of a convex mirror. The light ray travelling from point Y towards
R will be reflected back along the same path towards Y, which means the image
of the point Y will be created somewhere along the line YO. To know exactly
where the image is formed, we
have to draw another light ray from
the point X in another direction but
that’s not necessary because we
will find it by knowing where the
image of point X is formed.

To find the image of the point X we Pioure 8.19: In convex mirror if an object KY

have to draw two rays, one by is placed inside focal length, the image X'Y’
connecting the points X and O as we looks smaller.

have done before. (As the YR ray was
reflected back to the point Y, similarly this ray will be reflected back towards X

from the point N on the mirror.) The second ray can be drawn parallel to YR, which will
be incident on point P of the mirror and will appear to have diverged from the point F.
So we join the line FP and extend it towards Q.
228 Physics

The line FP intersects line OX at the point X’ i.e. the image of the point X will
be formed on the point X’. The perpendicular drawn from X’ to OY will intersect
line OY at Y’. Since it appears that the reflection of X is coming from point X’,
similarly it will appear that reflection of Y is coming from Y’. Hence, X’Y’ will
be the image of XY.
We can observe that X'Y’ is always smaller than XY and the further XY is from
the convex mirror, the smaller X’Y’ will get! One should know how to draw the
image of an object placed in front of a concave or convex mirror using the laws
of reflection. It is a very important procedure in physics.
It is clear that actually no light is coming from X’Y’, it just appears that the
image is there. Hence it is a virtual image. Comparing this with the images
formed by a plane mirror, we can see that-
(a) The position of this image will be between the focus and pole of the
mirror. The further the object is, the closer the image to the focus.
(b) This image is virtual.
(c) This image is upright.
(d) This image is small, and the further the object moves from the mirror,
the smaller the image becomes.

8.6 Concave Mirror

The inner side of a shiny spoon is an
example of a concave mirror. Those of you
who have looked at the inner side of a
spoon must have noticed (Figure 8.20) that
the image is small, and the interesting thing
is that the image is inverted! You can take
your finger very close to the spoon and
notice that the finger is upright. Now move
your finger slowly away from the spoon,
notice that your finger is starting to look
bigger (we were able to produce images in
plane mirror or convex mirror but never
images larger than the real size of the object
this is the first time we are seeing larger

Figure 8.20: A spoon works as a
concave mitror

2025
2025

Reflection of Light 229

image). If you move your finger away slowly then you will notice at one
point, that the image gets inverted! No matter where you are while moving away
from that point, it will always remain inverted. (We were never able to create
inverted images using plane mirrors or convex mirrors— this is the first time we
are observing an inverted image!)

So you can see that the outside part of a spoon works as a convex mirror and the
inside of a spoon works as a concave mirror! A real concave mirror is actually a
part of a sphere. In the case of a convex mirror light was reflected from the
outside convex shape and in the case of a concave mirror light will be reflected

from the inside concave shape. focal
If parallel rays are incident on a concave te Pe
mirror the light rays will converge at a H 2

point after reflection (Figure 8.21). You : A
can understand that this point is the focal i

point of the concave mirror and the : = ‘
distance from the pole to this point is pole =< =
known as the focal distance. Light rays N zs a
don’t have any option of stopping, so after —=
converging at a point they will travel \L a
straight forward and it will look like light is

diverging from that point! Therefore before . ;
reaching the focal point the rays are Figure 8.21: The focal distance of a

converging (convergent) and after reaching concave mirror is half of the radius of the
the focal point the rays are diverging sphere
(divergent).

Example

Question: If we imagine a plane mirror as a spherical concave mirror, what will

be its focal distance?
Answer: Infinite!

We got the same answer in case of convex mirrors, which means when the focal
distance increases to infinity then both convex and concave mirrors turn into
plane mirrors! The focal distance is half of the radius in concave mirrors as in a
convex mirror.
230 Physics

8.6.1 Image on concave mirror

Now we have entered the most exciting part! In plane mirrors and convex
mirrors only one type of image was formed. Two types of images can be formed
on a concave mirror. If an object is placed within the focal distance it forms one
type of image, if it is placed at a distance greater than the focal distance it creates
another type of image.

Before starting that, let us know how light rays reflect from a spherical concave
mirror. If we know the rules of reflection of three special light rays in a concave
mirror, we can explain how the image is formed:

(i) If light ray travels along the radius or starts from the center (Figure 8.22,

OP or ON ray), it will reflect perpendicularly and go back the way it has
come.

(ii) The ray parallel to the principal axis will go through the focal point (F) after
reflection (QF).

(iii) If the direction of light ray is changed, it goes back the way it has come.
So a light ray (figure 8.22, FQ) going through the focus will reflect parallel
(QX) to the principal axis.

Now we can create image for concave mirrors.

At a distance less than focal length

In Fig 8.22, a concave mirror is shown. This mirror is part of a sphere whose
center is O, focal point of the mirror is F and we want to determine the image of
the object XY. Light coming from point Y reflects from point P of the concave
mitror and again goes through point Y towards point O. So it can be
comprehended that it will stay on a point of line OP or on an extended part of
line OP. To determine this exact point another ray has to be drawn from point Y
towards the concave mirror, but we are not doing that. If we can determine the
image of the point X as before we can find the exact location of the image of
point Y. To determine the image of point X, two lines have to be drawn from this
point. The first line will be an extended part of the line OX. It will touch the

2025
2025

Reflection of Light 231

concave mirror perpendicularly and after reflection will go back the way it has
come. As shown in figure, another ray from point X can be a ray parallel to the
principal axis. Because we have already known that parallel ray goes through the
focal point after reflection. So it will be incident on the point Q and after
teflection will go through the point FE

Figure 8.22: Image appears larger than the object in the
concave mirror placed inside the focal length.

After emerging from point X two rays of light will travel towards NO and QF
and we can see that these two rays have no chance of intersecting. So there
cannot be an image formed on the right side. But if we are able to look at the left
side from the right side then it will look like line ON and line FQ coincide at X’
point- so X’ will be the image of X. If we draw a perpendicular from this point
on OP axis then we will get X"Y’ which is the full image of XY. No light is
coming from X’Y’, only we are thinking that the image is being formed there. So
this image is a virtual image. We can see from the figure that the image is larger
than the object. Not only will the image be larger but moving the object closer to
the focal point will create a yet larger image. (If the object is placed just on the
focal point then the reflected rays will become parallel meaning that the light
rays won’t be able to coincide to create an image.)

Now let’s see what happens to the image when we place an object within the
focal distance of a concave mirror:

(a) The position of the image will depend on the position of the real object. The
closer the object is placed to the focus further the image will be created.

(b) It is virtual

(c) Straight

(d) The length of the image will also depend on its position, the closer it gets to
the focal point the larger its length becomes.
232 Physics

At a distance greater than focal distance
Among all the images we have seen so far, this image is amazing, because we

will witness a real image for the first time, where light will be centralized where
the image will be created (Figure 8.23).

cases, the image of point Y will be on the
line YP. We have to draw two lines in
order to determine the image of point X.

Let, the object be XY and like other [
a

One line XQ will be parallel to the axis, ?
and after reflection it traverses through

the focal point F as QF. We can draw the
second ray through the point F. This will ® \
reflect in the concave mirror and after
reflecting, it will become parallel to RS,

Figure 8.23: The image becomes inverted if

as after reflection in the concave mirror 2” object is placed outside focal length of a

parallel rays traverse through the focal
point, the reverse is also true. Light always follows its path in reverse direction. Lines

concave mirror.

QF and RS intersect at the point X’ and point X’ is the image of point X.

So, the normal drawn on line PO
from X’ intersects at the point Y’ and

/ x
: X'Y’ is the image of object XY. This
image is unique compared to other
¥" ; images. This is shown in Figure 8.24.
aN 1a] ¥

The object XY is placed at a distance
3 more than two times of focal
\ « distance. This time the image has

become shorter. If the object is
placed at a distance of two times of
focal length, its image would appear
on the same point as shown in Fig
8.25. Not only this, the image's size

Figure 8.24: In a concave mirror if an
object is placed at a distance more than two
times of focal length the image formed is
inverted and short

2025
Reflection of Light 233

would be the same as the object. These three different cases can be written precisely

when the object is outside the focal distances. If any object is placed outside the focal

length, the images will be as follows:

(a) The position of the image depends on the position of the object. When the
object is placed within the focal point and at concave mirror's center, the
image will be formed outside the center. As the object is placed outside the
center of curvature of the concave mirror, the image be formed inside the

center. If the object is placed at the center, the image will also form at the
center.

(b) The image is real. So, as we can say that if the image itself is the object, the
object becomes the image.

(c) The image is inverted.

(d) The height of the image will depend upon its position. If it is formed in
between the focal point and the center of curvature, the height of the image
will be greater than the object. The nearer to the focal point, the greater it
is. If the object is outside the center of curvature, its height will be shorter
than the real object. If the object is placed at the center of curvature, the
size of the image will be the same as the object.

Characteristics of the image formed by a concave spherical mirror:

Position of the object Position of the image Characteristics of the image
At infinite distance Atfocal point F Real and zero length
Between infinite distance and Between center Real, inverted and short ened
center O O and focal point F
At center O At center O Real, inverted and of equal length
Between center O and focal point F| Between infinite distance and Real, inverted and magnified
center O
Atfocal point F At infinite distance No image is formed
Between focal point Fand pole P Between infinite distance (Virtual, non-inverted and magnifie|
andpole P (behind)
At pole P At pole P Virtual, non-inverted and of equal

length

Forma-30, Physics, Class 9-10
234 Physics

We applied geometry to determine the position, shape etc. of images for convex
and concave mirrors. We could do these works using a single formula. The
formula is :

Where, u is the distance of object from the plane of the mirror, v is the distance
of the image and fis the focal distance.

Real image is a very important idea. We will find in the next chapter how real
images can be formed with a lens. You have already seen that there are real light
rays in a real image, so if it is projected on a screen, it is possible to see the
image. In ordinary mirrors, you can look at yourself but you cannot project
yourself on screens with ordinary mirrors.

Question: Figure 8.24 shows that the

image of object XY is formed at

X'Y’. If the object is X'Y’, where will Q x
the image be formed?

Answer: This is a real image. So if
X’Y’ is an actual object, the image P
will be XY.

Question: : If an object is placed just \e
at a distance double of its focal length
in a concave mirror, where will the

image be formed? Figure 8.25: In concave mirror, if an

object is placed at a distance double of its

Answer: (Figure 8.25) The image focal length, the image will form at the
will be formed at the same position, same position in inverted condition.
be of the same size but in inverted

form.

Till now we have learnt the science of concave mirrors, now we will see how to
use it.

2025
2025

Reflection of Light 235

8.7. Magnification

We have seen that an image can be larger or smaller than the real object, this is
called magnification. Magnification refers to how large the image is than
the real object. If the length of an object is 1 and length of its image is I', then
magnification is l'

m=-—

I
When we see an object through a telescope, how large the object is when seen

with the naked eye as compared to its size as seen by a telescope is known as the
telescope's magnification.

8.8 Use of Mirror

8.8.1 Plane Mirror

Simple mirrors are most commonly used in our daily lives. Ordinary mirrors are
used whenever a light ray travelling in one direction is to be redirected in another
direction. You must have noticed that in a plane mirror right and left side
alternates. So if we want to keep the right and left unchanged, the image of one
mirror is to be reflected by a second mirror.

The left and right sides are interchanged in a plane mirror image. Right and left do not
interchange if two mirrors are used as a single mirror by keeping them at 90°
angle with each other. You may demonstrate it by using two mirrors (Figure
8.26).

Figure 8.26: In ordinary mirror the left and right are interchanged, where as two
mirrors are kept at right angles to leave left and right unchanged.
236 Physics

An important point to note is, when a good reflection is necessary, quite a
different kind of reflection is done instead of using an ordinary plane mirror. We
will see in the next chapter how light is reflected by a completely transparent
medium.

8.8.2 Convex Mirror

A diminished and erect image can be created by using a convex mirror. So a
convex mirror is used to see a large scene in a small region. Expert drivers
always trying to notice of what is happening behind the car while driving. So,
there is a rear view mirror in front of the driver. Convex mirrors are used in these
mirrors so that drivers can see a vast area behind the car with the help of a small
mirror.

8.8.3 Concave Mirror

The most important use of concave mirrors

is in telescopes. Concave mirrors are used in

the largest and the smallest telescopes of the /
world. Many of us generally think that the
only function of a good telescope is to create
a large image of the small objects situated i. ni
far away. Actually that’s not true, the il
function of a good telescope is also to create A

a distinct image in very dim light. That is

why the bigger the concave mirror is, the \
more light it can converge to create a clear

image. Concave mirrors are used in all of

the large telescopes of the world. Figure 8.27: When an intense
light source is placed at the focal

point, then that light is reflected

Another use of concave mirrors is to create a
parallel beam of light. Concave mirrors are ‘
used in search lights of ships or launches. The at the concave MITTOF as parallel
light source is kept at the focus of the mirror, beam of light.

so the light rays are incident on the concave mirror and reflected back as parallel
beams of light. The torch lights you use in your daily life, also have the bulb kept just
at the focus of a concave mirror!

Since an erect and magnified image is formed when an object is placed within the focal
length of a mirror, we use concave mirrors if we want to see a magnified image of any

2025
2025

Reflection of Light 237

object. Doctors and dentists often use concave mirrors when they try to observe
something.

8.8.4 Safe Driving

Development of the transportation system of a country is necessary when a country is
trying to develop. New roads are constructed and vehicles of many types start moving
on those roads. You must have noticed that the huge number of vehicles travelling
through the roads in our country and how the number of vehicles is increasing day by
day. A huge amount of time is wasted because of traffic jams created due to insufficient
roads and many people die due to accident on highways. These deaths occur mainly
due to the reason that drivers jeopardize safe driving for reaching destinations quickly
rather than safely. Many kinds of awareness is required for safe driving, correct use of
light is one of them.

Brake lights play an important role while driving. Seeing this light the driver of the
preceding car can be sure if the car in front is trying to slow down or in which direction
the car will go. Whether the car will change lanes or not, the turn lights are used to
inform others. The head lights in front of the car illuminates the dark roads but there are
some specific rules for using headlights. The high beams are not used when a car is
coming from the opposite direction so that the eyes of the driver are not dazzled by the
bright lights. A driver has to be aware of the sides and back of the car besides the front.
That’s why there’s a rear view mirror in front and side view mirror on both sides of the
car, Convex mirror are used here so that an image of a large area can be created in such
a small mirror. A good driver always keeps track of what is happening on all sides of
the car as well as what’s happening in front of the car.

8.8.5 Invisible Curves of Hilly Roads

Hilly roads are usually curved as well as uneven. Besides, there are hills on one side
and a deep ditch on the other side of the road. This is why the drivers should be careful
while driving on hilly roads. Still driving in some areas can be very risky. Especially
when there is almost a 90° turn ahead and the driver cannot see what is coming from
the other direction. In these circumstances, a plane mirror is placed at 45° at the turns.
Then the drivers can see what’s happening on both sides and driving in those areas becomes

comparatively safe.
238 Physics

(?) Exercise
General questions

1.How the sensitivity of eyes can determined for different colors?

2. Why are the danger signals shown in red colors though human eyes can see
yellowish green the most?

3.In mirrors, right and left interchanges, Why do the top and bottom not
interchange?

4. Why colors cannot be seen in moonlight?

5. Why concave mirrors are used in the telescopes used by astronomers?

6. What do you mean by reflection of light?

7, What do you mean by regular and irregular reflection?

8. What is a mirror?

9. What is called an image? How many types of images are there? What are
they?

10. How is real image formed in a concave mirror? Demonstrate with the help

of a ray diagram.

Mathematical questions

1. A mirror is placed as shown in figure
8.28. In which direction will the light ray,
shown in figure 8.28, go?

2. For a convex mirror (figure 8.29a)
show where the image will be formed for
an object XY by drawing a ray diagram.

3. For a concave mirror (figure 8.29 b)
show where the image will be formed for
an object XY by drawing a ray diagram.

2025
2025

Reflection of Light 239

(a) {b)

L.
= x

SS
=
=

Figure 8.29: (a) An object placed inside the focal length of a convex mirror.
(b) An object placed inside focal length of a concave mirror.

4. For a concave mirror (figure 8.30a) show where the image will be formed for
an object XY by drawing a ray diagram.

(a) (b)

Figure 8.30: (a) An object placed outside focal length in concave mirror.
(b) An object placed outside focal length in concaves mirror.

5. For a concave mirror (figure 8.30 b) show where the image will be formed for
an object XY by drawing a ray diagram.

\o> Multiple choice questions
wnt

Put the tick (Vy) mark on the correct answer.

1.Where are convex mirrors used?
(a) Cars (b) Torch light
(c) Solar oven (d) Radar
240 Physics

2. How many types of reflections are there?
(a) 4 (b) 3
(c) 2 (d) 1
3. Image produced in a plane mirror -
(i) equal to object in size
(ii) can be formed on a screen
(iii) formed at a distance equal to the distance of the object from the mirror.

Which one of the following is correct?
(a) i and ii (b) ii and iii
(c) i and iii (d) i, ii and iii

Answer question number 4 and 5 in light of the above |

ao -}o

figure. : ;
4. What will be the size of object BO?
(a) magnified (b) diminished

(d) extremely magnified (d) extremely diminished
Figure: 8.31

5. What will be the position of the object BO?
(a) between the focus and the pole (b) at the principal focus
(c) at the centre of curvature (d) between the centre of curvature and
infinity

Creative questions

Figure 8.32

2025
241

1. Figure 8.32
(a) What is a plane mirror?
(b) Why is a metal coating given behind a mirror?
(c) Determine the position of the image of the object PQ by drawing a

figure.
(d) Compare the mirrors 1 and 2 in the formation of images.

2. Figure 8.33
(a) What is an image? Q
(b) Why rays incident normally on the mirror turns back
along the same path?
(c) Determine the value of the angle of reflection in Ng
light of the figure above?

(d) The image formed in the plane mirror PQ is virtual;
explain with the help of diagram.

3. A group of students found that if a stick of 2 cm length is
placed in front of a concave mirror, an image of 3.51
magnification is formed on the screen in the first step. Inthe Figure 8.33
second step of the experiment they found an image on the
screen of magnification 6.

P

(a) What is magnification?

(b) Why plain mirrors are not used as view mirrors?

(c) Calculate the length and property of the image of the stick in the first step
of the experiment.

(d) What are the changes made in the second step of the experiment?

Forma-31, Physics, Class 9-10
