Chapter Three
Map Reading and Its Uses

Map is a very important tool for a geographer. A clear idea can be formed about a
region from it. We can show the whole world or a part of it through a map. We
can provide information about a particular region by drawing a map and using
some signs. A map is necessary not only for the geographer but also for all
people especially travelers, administrators, planners, architects, engineers,
agriculiurisis, meteorologists and even the common people. In this chapter

classification of map, its importance, uses, local time and standard time etc. will be
discussed.

So | Sua ~~ Ta T —

poo), oo a
aD ijaa erpsatend’ 4
9 Utiar Para m

eae ae a D ]

* AMAP OF A VILLAGE

School

= | CLOCLo*

N Settiement =° Road
t Scale 4 Inches = 1 Mile River

oe ,

=

Asketch of a village
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-
*s  explam the concept, importance and use, of a map;
* describe the maps of various kinds;
* explain how to present information on a map for practical use;
* explain local time and standard time:

* explain why time changes from place to place;
* use of GPS and GIS in the map.

2025
2025

Map Reading and Its Uses

Concept of map, importance and use

Look at the following map. It is the administrauye map of Bangladesh, On the
paper the international boundary of Bangladesh, countries around the borders of

Bangladesh are located and the sea is drawn. Besides these, it also shows the eight
divisions, the districts

on a map in one page.

a a ag? a a
BANGLADESH
. a ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS
Lae
fi as -* LEGEND
\\ osand as iiternatinnal Boundary ., ... , Capbeal s
ot tie a «  Eiwsron Boundary wna eo Drvinon Headquariess
us aba i Sig District Boundary eee taieg Bee ee
: Sais pur as ‘aa sa ain j i
r™ INTLA "Yo Beg “e INDIA, aid
ce

Cox's 5 ’. si,

BAY OF BENGAL

as ant ha

Fig. 3.1} Administrative units of Bangladesh

in each division, their names and areas, The whole
administrative area has been shown in one page (fig. 3.1). In this way, the whole
world, different continents, countries or different divisions and districts can be shown
32 Geography and Environment

You might have seen a wall map in your school. In your Geography and Environment
books or in any atlas you might have seen maps. Map gives us ideas about a region,
the nature of land, climate, plants, earth, water and many other things. We can learn
a lot about different continents and oceans through it. The map may be defined as a

representation of the earth's pattern as a whole or a part of it on a plane surface with
conventional signs, drawn to a scale and projection so that each and every point on it
correspond to the actual part.

The word thap comes from the Latin words ‘mappa’. In earlier times maps were
drawn on clothes. The size of the map varies according to scale. There are three
ways with which the scale of the map is shown.

Methods of showing scale

(a) By statement

(b) By graphical scale

(c) By representative fraction or R.F.

(a) By statement : We express the scale by statement such as four miles to one
inch, one mule to 16 inches, etc. in every respect the first 1 (inch) is the map

distance and second mumber (mile, yard, kilometre) is the distance on the ground.

(b) By graphical seale : The scale of map can be expressed by dividing a particular
line into a number of equal parts and is marked to show what these divisions
represent on the actual ground. By drawing a line of 5 centimetres and dividing it into
3 equal parts.each part is 10 kilometres (fig. 3.2). Leaving one centimetres on the left

side and further dividing into equal parts of smaller sections each representing
2 kilometres.

Kilometres 10 6 20 10 20 30 40 Kilometres
Fig 3.2; Linear seale
{c) By representative fraction or R.F: Representative fraction expresses the
proportion of the scale by a fraction in which the numerator is one and the
denominators also in the same unit. Representation fraction is commonly written

as R.F. and is shown in the map as 1:100,000. This means one unit on the map
represents 100,000 on the ground, Ifthe 1 unit is in inch then 100.000 is also in inch,

2025
Qo
tat

Map Reading and Its Uses

if it is in centimetres then both the units should be same, The formula of calculating
RLF. is given below :

RF= Map distance
“Ground distance

Information that will be given in a map depends on (a) scale, (b) projection, (c)
conventional signs, (d) skill of the cartographer and the, (e) type of map.

In the modern world, use of maps is very important. Map is known as the tools of
geography but it is also very important for the students, historians, engineers,
businessmen, journalist, soldiers, pilots, captains of the ships and many more.

Classification of maps

There may be various types of maps. Generally, on the basis of scale used in
scale. again the maps and subject matter, the maps are classified into two groups.
According to the maps are of two types : (a) large scale maps and (b) small scale
maps.Navigation charts, aeronautical charts, mouza maps or cadastral maps are large
scale maps. As a small area is enlarged. so many date or information can be
accommodated in ihe map. Atlases, wall maps are small scale maps. The whole
world or the continent or any big region like that of a country when shown on a
sheet of paper, small space remains in the map. So, a lot of information cannot be
shown on this type of map.

There are many types of maps:

Mouza Map

1. Cadastral or mouza map : The term
cadastral is derived from French word

‘cadestre’ meaning register of territorial
property. The cadastral maps are drawn to
resister the ownership of landed property by
demarcating the boundaries of fields and
buildings. The village maps of our country
and the city plan maps belong to this
category (fig. 3.3). These maps are very large |, inna saonezomenes
et ee |

scale maps which are drawn ona seale of 16

inch to 1 mile or 32 inch to 1 mile. Fig, 3.3 : Mouza map

Forma-5, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
34 Geography and Environment

2. Topographic map : Topographic maps are made on a large scale on the basis of
precise survey of the area, They show general surface features in detail which
contain both natural landscape and man-made features. The scale of the topographic
map varies from | inch to 1 mile to inch to 1 mile. Topographic map shows relief,
rivers, forests, villages, towns, roads and railways (fig. 3.4). The topographic maps
are prepared in different scales in different countries. The standard and most
popular topographic survey map of British Ordinance Survey is 1 inch to 1 mile.
Topographic maps of Bangladesh have been made into three scales. Le.
i.) 1 inch=1 mile, (ii) 1:50,000 and (iti.) 1:250,000. The last two types of scales
have been adopted for the latest topographic maps of Bangladesh. Different maps are
made in different countries. British made maps are the best and popular at present. The
scale of this map is from 1:25,000 aad 1:1,00,000. In Bangladesh we follow the British

scales.

iy Houde pur}
ro

= & g* Magipor ©*
y gie ath

Is es ets

Fig, 3.4 ; Topographic map

2025
2025

Map Reading and Its Uses 35

3. Wall map : Wall maps are generally drawn a a Ea # ¥
for using in the classroom. The world as a
whole or in hemispheres are shown on the
wall maps. Wall maps may also be prepared
for a country or continent, large or small
according to need (fig, 3.5). Their scale is
smaller than topographic maps but larger than
atlas map.

4, Chorographical or atlas map : A
collection of map is called an Atlas. The scale
of the atlas map varies from 1:100,000 to
1:1000,000, These are small scale map which
fives a more or less highly generalized
information regarding the physical and
economic conditions of different regions of
the world. The whole world is shown in one Fig. 3.5; Wall map

page mn this map. The districts of Bangladesh are shown in one page. This map is made
based on natural, cultural, econornic and agricultural features.

5. Physical map : Map which shows the natural features as mountains, plains, rivers,
deserts, wetlands of a country or a region is known as physical maps.These natural
features are shown with different colours. Plants are shown by ereen colour,
mountains and hills by brown colour, rivers and water bodies by blue colour and

highland or plateau by yellow or orange colour.

6. Geological map: The rocks that form the crust of the earth, their mode of

formation and deposition are shown on geological map.

7. Climatic map: The climatic map shows the average condition of temperature,

pressure, wind and precipitation of a region over a long period of time.

8. Vegetation map : Vegetation map shows the natural vegetation of a region.
36 Geography and Environment

9, Soil map: The soil map shows the various types of soil covering the area,

Agriculturists use this map usally as it highlights the quality of soil of a particular area.

10. Cultural map : Economic condition, political boundary, historical places are

shown on cultural maps. Cultural map can be divided into some parts. These are :

a. Political map : Most widely used map showing the boundary of a region,
country. division, districts etc.

b. Distribution map : Map showing the distribution of population, crops, animals.

industries of a region or a country is known as the distribution map.

ce. Historical map : Map showing places of historical importance is the historical map.

d. Social map: Map showing the distribution of religion, language, nationality is

known as social map.

e. Land use map : Major land uses of an area or region are shown in land use maps.
These maps show various kinds of land uses in urban and rural areas such as
roads, buildings, industries and parks are shown in urban land use maps and

cropland, homestead, fallow land, forest etc. are shown on a rural land use map.

Techniques of presenting information in a map

A Map is a geographers tool which is used by various types of people from
different occupations, The natural and cultural features that are shown in a map should
be universal, so that people belonging to any country can tread the map by
knowing the international conventional signs used in the map. The international
conventional signs are given so that students have a general understanding of those
signs (fig. 3.6).

2025
2025

Map Reading and Its Uses 37

Table of international conventional sign used in map

Pacca Road Kacha Road = [International Boundary | District Boundary
Broad Gauge Railway | Metre Gauge Railway | Duel Gauge Railway) Water Bodies
on =
River Lake Village Mosque

Si. a8 |
Temple Tree/Forest Light House Airport
Bs a ‘ a9 e 4 .
“9 2 @

, Bridge , Idgah Industry Mountain
f/f.»

Embankment Xk
ad

Fig. 3.6; Intemational conventional sign

Marginal information of a map : All the information required to understand a map
should be around its margins. Marginal information includes (i) Title/heading, (ii)
Seale, (iii) North line, (iv) Legend and (v) Source of data,

(i) Title‘heading : Each map has a title or heading. It shows the type of map. If
il is 4 political map of Bangladesh, the title will be ‘political map' followed by
Bangladesh.

(ii) Scale : There are three common ways to show the scale by statement,
representative fraction/R-F or linear or graphical scale.lo roake the map of an area
38 Geography and Environment

we have to draw the volume in the form miniature. It is drawn in terms of scale. The
more the scale is smal] the more the volume will be bigger. If it is written 1: 1,00,000
in the map it means 1= 1,00,000 units. It is shown in the seale that 1 inch= 1 mile.

(iii) North line : North line is important for a map. It is usually considered the top
section of the map as northern part of the map. North line can be shown anywhere in
the map within the margin of the map. The position of the north line depends on the
layout and size of the map within the margin.

(iv) Legend : In each map some data is presented in the form of some conventional
signs, colour or shades. The representing signs, colours and shades are shown in the
legend.

(v) Source of data: All maps are drawn on the basis of information or data so the
source of data should be provided outside the margm i.e. border of the map layout.

Local time and standard time

As the earth rotates, every place has its sunrise, sunset and noon.When the Sun is
at its highest point in the sky, it is noon and also known as zenith.

The earth rotates from west to east. So, places in the east see the Sun first. Places in
the west see it later. So, for each 1° of longitude towards the east. a time of 4 minutes
has to be added, For each 1° of longitude towards the west a time of 4 minutes to
be subtracted from the Greenwich Mean Time or GMT, which is the 0° meridian
or prime meridian located at Greenwich in London.

Local time

Everyday the earth moves round her axis from west to east. As a resull, the sun
appears earlier in the places located in the east. Due to rotation of the earth, the sun
reaches the zenith of the sky,or in other words, the sun reaches its highest altitude on
a certain place and that hour is treated as12:00 noon.On the basis of this noon time,
the other time for the day is determined. The time thus determined is the local time
for that place. So, the local time of a place is determuned on the basis of the highest
altitude of the sun which can be observed with the help of a sextant.

The earth at the centre creates 360°.The earth requires 1440 minutes (24 hours
x 60 minutes) to cover this distance of 360° for one time.So,the earth needs
4 minutes (1.440 + 360) to rotate 1° of longitude. Therefore, for 1°difference
of longitude, the difference of time will be 4 minutes.

2025
2025

Map Reading and Its Uses 39

Standard time

In any country there are many meridians of longitude that ran through the country.
If there are ten meridians running through a country as each meridian is 4 minutes
apart so, 10x 4= 40 minutes, so in that country there will be ten different local
times according to the meridians. To avoid this confusion, the local time of a central
meridian of a country is taken as the time for the whole country. This is called the
Standard time, Some countries have great longitudinal extent, so they have more than
one standard time. Example USA has five and Canada six time zones.

There is a general understanding among the countries of the world to select the
standard meridian of any country in multiples of 7.5° longitude. Every 7.5°
longitude makes a difference of 30 minutes.

Time difference on the basis of location

In the earlier chapter we have seen for 1° longitude, the time difference is 4
minutes. We know, earth rotates from West to East. For this reason, in Bangladesh
day comes earlier in the places which are located in the East than those which are
located in the West. From this we can understand that morning comes earlier in
those countries which are located in the East of Bangladesh and those couniries
which are located in the West of Bangladesh. morning comes later.

We know for the difference of 1° longitude, time difference becomes 4 minutes. This
1° is divided into 60 minutes and for every 1 minute, time difference becomes 4
seconds. So, for 60 minutes it requires 60 x 4 = 240 seconds or 4 minutes.

On the basis of above discussion, some mathematical calculations will make
it clearer.

Example 1 : The difference of longitude of a place east of Dhaka is 50°30’. When
Dhaka sees 6 o' clock moming, what is the local time of that place?

Solution
The difference of the place from Dhaka = for 50°30"
=(50xX4)minutes+(30 x 4) seconds (cast longitude the difference of time will be added)

= 200 minutes + 120 seconds
= 200 minutes + 2 minutes (as | minute = 60 seconds)

= 202 minutes
40 Geography and Environment

Time difference will be 202 minutes or 3 hours 22 minutes.

Here, the place whose local time is to be determined lies to the east of Dhaka. So,
local ime will be greater because the sun rose earlier in the east. So, 3 hours 22

minutes is to be added to the time of Dhaka. Now

So, the time of that place i Dhaka Determind place
= Time in Dhaka + time difference asia

=60' clock + 3 hours 22 minutes West 60 cock 9:22 minutes at
=9o' clock 22 minutes eae —e
50, the local time of that place is 9:22 minutes South

Answer : 9:22 minutes.

Example 2: The longitude of Dhaka is 90° east and that of Rivadh is 45° east.
When the local time of Dhaka is 2 o clock noon, what is the local time of Riyadh’?

Solution

We know that there is 4 minutes time difference for each longitude
The longitudinal difference between Dhaka and Rivadh 90°— 45° = 45°
Time ditference will be 45 x 4 = 180 minutes or 3 hours.

We can understand from the question mentioned 45° east longitude that Riyadh lies
to the west of Dhaka. So, this 3 hours will be deducted from Dhaka's local time.

So, the local time of Rivadh will be
=2.0' clock at noon —3 hours (here 2 o' clock means 14 hours),
= 14 hours —3 hours

= 11 hours
Answer : The local time of Riyadh will be 1] o' clock.
Example 3 : The longitude of *A’ city is 70°45' east and that of ‘B’ city is 15°15"

When the local time of ‘A’ city is 7 o' clock in the moming, what is the local time of
‘B city?

2025
Map Reading and Its Uses 41

Solution
The difference of longitude of the two cities is
= 70°45'-15°15'= 55°30!

We know for each 1 degree time difference is 4 minutes and for each | minute
time difference is 4 seconds. So, 55°30" time difference will be

= (55 4) minutes + (30 * 4) seconds
= 220 minutes + 120 seconds
= 220 minutes + 2 minutes (as | minute = 60 seconds)

= 222 minutes = 3 hours 42 minutes

As the value of longitude of ‘A’ city is less than ‘B’ city, we can understand that
‘B’ city stands west of ‘A’ city. So, the local time of “B’ city can be obtained by
deducting the local time of ‘A’ city.

So, the time will be at place “B’
=7 0’ clock morning — 3 hours 42 minutes
=3 hours 18 minutes means morning 3 hours 18 minutes

Answer : The local time of ‘B’ city is 3 hours 1 minutes.

Example 4: The local time difference between Dhaka and Tokyo is 3 hours 17
minutes 16 seconds. If the longitude of Dhaka is 90°26' east, what is the longitude of
Tokyo?

Solution

The difference of time between Dhaka and Tokyo is 3 hours 17 minutes 16 seconds.
By calculating = (180+17) minutes 16 seconds = 197 minutes 16 seconds

In every 4 minutes | degree and every 4 seconds | minute time difference. We can get
— For 196 minutes 49° and for rest 1 minute 16 seconds 19’ means 49°19",

So, Tokyo lies to the east and its longitude will be = 90°26'+ 49°19" = 139°45' east
Answer ; 139°45' east,

Forma-6, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
4? Geography and Environment

GPS and GIS maps

At present the use of GPS and GIS are the most modern form of information for
study and management.

The English of GPS is Global Positioning System. If we want to know the global
location of a certain place, the easiest way of knowing it is through GPS.

Through GPS the latitude, longitude, height and distance of a certain place can be
found. Besides, the north line, date and time of that place can be known.

Working principle of GPS

GPS collects information from the land-satellite through its
receiver (fig, 3.7). To collect this information GPS needs cloud
free sky. The GPS machine can work accuralely in the clear
sky. Sometimes it faces problems to identify the location of
steep high hills, buildings and it is tume consuming also.

Benefits of GPS : Among many discoveries of technology
GPS has earned a wide popularity as a very valuable tool for the
geographers. With the help of this tool we can find out latitude,
longitude and other matters within seconds. In our country a great
problem lies in land surveying. We will be able to identify the
boundary of our land without any problem. This will save much
of our time: During any natural disaster we will be able to send Fig. 3.7: GPS
relief goods to a certain place by identifying its exact location by

latitude and longitude with this GPS.

Demerits of GPS : GPS has some problems along with its benefits. These are—its
price is high, so it is not easily available. Most of the people are not familiar with

it. Besides these, people tend to use traditional system.

Geographical information system

Storing and analyzing geographical information system is known as GIS. It isa
computerized system of storing information and analysis. This system helps to prepare
future plan through storing geographical information, analysis and management,
identifying spatial problem.The use of GIS started first in 1964 mm Canada, Gradually
people started using it widely around 1980.

2025
2025

Map Reading and Its Uses 43

At present it is being used in land management, natural resource development,
water research, urban and regional planning, population analysis, transport and
communication system analysis.

The utility of a map is increased by it through the presentation of many kinds of
data and analyzing those data in the map. For example,we can have a full idea
of a particular place by showing its water management, topography, land use,
communication, soil, road etc, in a map.

Exercise
Maltiple choice questions
1. Why is wall map prepared?
a. For classroom b. For field
c. For lulls d. For climate

2. What will be the time difference when one moves 5° east from the prime
meridian line?
a. 16 minutes b. 20 minutes

c. 24 minutes d. 28 minutes

Read the following text and answer questions 3 and 4:

The village in which Sumon lives has both plains and lowland. He has drawn a map
after the chapter dealing with the study of map and its use.

3. What kind of map is Sumon’s village?
a. Atlas b. Physical
ec. Cultural d, Cadastral
44

Geography and Environment

4.) Which colour will be used for land of Sumon’s village?

a.

Cc.

Blue b. White

Green d. Brown

Creative questions

1. Flora Begum started for London at 9 0’ clock in the morning on Friday from Dhaka.

After landing at Hitherto Airport she saw that it was 6 0° clock in the evening but
her own watch showed/read 12 o' clock night.

a
b.

Cc,

What is Local Time?
What is Standard Time? Explain.
If the longitude of the city Flora saw was 0°. what is the longitude of Dhaka?

Analyze the causes of time difference between Dhaka and the city mentioned
in the lines.

Fig. 2

Whai ts the full name of GIS?

What is Representative fraction? Explain.
Explain which map can describe the above figure L.

Analyze the importance of figure 2 in our life.

2025
