CHAPTER SEVEN
Industries of Bangladesh

Nafis’ s elder uncle is an Engineer in a cement factory at Chatok. During the
vacation, Nalis along with his parents and cousins went to visit his uncle. His
uncle took him with his other cousins to show how the cement is prepared. Nalis
noticed the piles of stones there. His uncle informed that numerous numbers of
stones are coming from India everyday. These stones are the raw materials for
making cement. These stones are converted into cement with various processes.
The cement of Chatok is very good in quality.

Chatok cement industry is an important industry in Bangladesh. In this chapter
we shall learn about various types of industries in Bangladesh and their impor-
tance, problems and posebiiney

ae

—
iw

At the end of this chapter we shall be able to —
« Explain the concept, features and importance of cottage industries

e Identify the suitable areas of cottage Industries
« Find out the hindrances against the development of cottage industry
* Find out the ways to spread small industries.

* Mark the necessary things to be done for the development of cottage

industries.
® Explain the concept of small and medium size business, its features
and importance,
« Explain the formation process of small and medium size enterprise
* Considering the socio-economic condition of the country, specially
your locality find out the suitable areas for small and medium size enterprise.
Identify the problems relating to small and medium size enterprise
Explain the concept and features of large scale industries.
Explain the importance of large scale business in context of socio-
economic condition of Bangladesh.

Will be encouraged to set up small, medium and cottage industries,

£023
2025

Industries of Bangladesh 93

Classification of Industry

Generally, Industry is the process of converting raw materials or primary
products inte secondary or finished goods using heavy capital investment.
Manufacturing of an industry is factory based and factories of a particular
product is known as industry as a whole. Such as, Jute Industry, Garments
Industry, etc. Though, Bangladesh is an agricultural country, contribution of
industry to the economy is not insignificant. In this particular case, government
and non-government assistance and entrepreneurship are also increasing. As per
National Industry Policy 2022, Industry in Bangladesh is divided in to
Manufacturing Industry and Service Industry.

a. Manufacturing Industry

Production, processing, addition and later refinement and processing of
produced goods. all are included in the manufacturing industry. In
manufacturing industry, raw materials are processed into finished goods using
labor and technology. Garments industry, Sugar industry, Jute and Jute Products
industry, Fertilizer industry, Cement industry, Leather industry, Ship Building
industry, Rail and Engineering industry, all are examples of manufacturing
industry.

Rising Ship Building Industry
a4 Business Entrepreneurship

b. Service Industry

Using the machineries, fixed assets or intellectual properties, the service related
activities provided by the industries are included in the service industries.
Fishing, Construction and Housing. Automobile Servicing, Entertainment
Industry, Horticulture, Floriculture, Flower Cultivation and Marketing, Milk and
Poultry Rearing and Marketing, Hospital & Clinic, Tourism, Transportation and
Communication are the examples of Service Industry.

Lo

Bangladesh Rail way; important medium of Government Transportation System

In respect of investment required for the industry; manufacturing and service
industry are divided into four categories. These are Cottage Industry, Small
Industry, Medium Industry and Large Industry.

Cottage Industry

Cottage Industry refers to those industries which are mainly family based and
where fixed capital is including installation cost not more than 10 lac taka
excluding land and factory building and manpower does not exceed 15 including
the family members. Generally, cottage industry is operated by husband-wife,
son-daughter, brothers-sisters and other members of the family. They are
engaged in the job for full time or part time basis.

2025
2025

Industries of Bangladesh

95

Various products of Cottage Industry

Suitable Areas for Cottage Industry in Bangladesh

Cottage industry is established on the basis of small place, less capital,
individual efficiency and creativity, technical knowledge and help of the family
members. Various types of cottage industry have enriched our country. Cottage
industries at various place have gamed so much popularity that those places are
known by the industry of that place. Such as Rangamati Cottage Industry,
Manipuri Cottage Industry, Khadi of Cumilla etc. A list of suitable Cottage
Industry in Bangladesh is mentioned below:

Nature of Cottage Industry

Manufactured Products

Jute Based Industry

School Bag, Net, Wall Mat, Sandal, Carpet

Bamboo & Cane Industry Basket, Bulb Shed, Tray, Chair, Cradle, Doll
Flower, Vase, Mat, Dala, Kula, Chalun
Pottery Various Animals, Fruits, Flower, Utensils,

Showpiece, Doll, Flower Vase, Flower Tub,
Canter, Pitcher and other products.

Weaving and Garments
Industry

Saree, Lungi, Table Cloth, Sofa Cloth, Jamdani,
Sweater, Bag, Muffler, Cap, Wall Mat, Sheet,
Towel, Winter Cloth, Readymade Garment,
Hosiery ete.

Food and supporting Industry

Chanachur, Jam-jelly, Honey, Molasses, Sweets,
Card, Chips, Vermicelli, Confectionary ete.

Handicrafts Industry

Hand made Carpet, Mat, Nakshi katha, Office
Stationary, Book Binding, Fishing Net, Packet
of Sweetmeat,

96 Business Entrepreneurship

Shell Industry Garland, Ornaments, Toys, Showpiece
Small Steel & Engineering |Da, Spade, Shovel, Knife, Scissor, Surma Pot,
Industry Radio Television & Fridge Repairing, Automobile

workshop and servicing center,

Chemical & Pharmaceutical | Oil, Perfume, Rose Water, Agorbati, Candle, Soap,
Industry Fenile

Activity-1 : Make a list of the cottage industry established in your area.

Small Industry

A-small industry is an industry in the manufacturing concern having asset value
with installation cost ranging from Taka 75 lac to 15 crore excluding value of
land and factory building @ and worker is 31-120 is called a Small Industry.

Small Industry
In case of Service Industry, Small Industry means mdusiry having asset value
including installation cost of Taka 10 lac to 2 crore excluding land and factory
building and worker is limited to 16 to 50.

Medium Industry

In terms of manufacturing concern, medium industry means, excluding land and
factory building, other fixed assets including installation cost having value of
Taka 15 crore to 50 crore and engaged number of labor ranging from 121 to
300.

2025
Industries of Bangladesh

a7

Incase of Service Industry, Medium Industry means industry having asset value
including installation cost of Taka 2 crore to 30 crore excluding land and factory
building and worker is limited to 51 to 120.

Medium Size Garment Industry
Suitable place for Small and Medium Size Industry-

Type of Small and Medium
Industry

Produced Products

Food & Food based Products

Flour, East, Sujl, Vermicelli, Bread & Biscuit, Red
Sugar, Honey Refinement, Dried and Tinned Fish,
Oil Mill, Chocolate, Cigarette & Bin Factories,
Rice, Puffed Rice, Pressed Rice, Khoi etc. making
(including automated rice mill)

Garments

Plain Cloth, Bed sheet, Cloth for Shirting -Suiting
Saree, Towel etc,

Jute and Jute Goods

Yarn, Sutli, Jute Bag ,Cloth Carpet Jute Sandal
and all jute based products

Forest Industry

Wood, Things made of bamboo & cane, Saw Mill,
Toy made of wood and Furniture, Sports Items

Printing & Publishing Industry

Various Types of Paper, Packet, Carton etc.

Leather & Rubber Industry

Bag of Leather & Rubber, Shoe Factory

Small Steel and Engineering
Industry

Tube-well, Agricultural Tools, Tools for Mills &
Factories, Automobile Items,

Chenucal & Pharmaceutical

Industry

Various Types of Color, Paints, Plastic Factories,
Pharmaceutical Industry, Manure, Mixed
Fertilizer, Making of Guti Urea

Glass and Ceramic Industry

Various Types of Glass and Ceramic Products,
Utensils of China Clay,

Cold Storage

Various Types of Cold Storage

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-13
28 Business Entrepreneurship

Problems of Small and Medium Industries in the Context of Bangladesh.

Though the contributions of small industries are increasing day by day for
socio-economic and cultural development, yet some problems still exit im
developing such industries. The Problems are: traditional concepts, want of raw
materials, want of financial support, availability of huge foreign goods in the
local markets, poor transport system. lack of support to enter into local and
international markets.

Contribution of Cottage, Small and Medium Industries to the
Economy of Bangladesh:

In a developing country like Bangladesh, the cottage, Small and Medium size
industries play a vital role for the development of the economy. Their
contribution towards alleviation of poverty and employment generation is
mentionable. Almost ninety six percent of the industries of the country are
included in cottage, small and medium size industries. These industries are a
major source for generating employment. Millions of people of the country are
engaged in this type of industries. These types of industries are formed with
small amount of capital, locally available raw materials, individual efficiency,
creativity and help of other family members especially from the women. As a
result, thousands of people get employed. Particularly, self-employment
generation and alleviation of unemployment among the village women, cottage
and small industries have a significant role. Cottage and Small Industries have
been contributing significantly to maintain and spread out the history and
tradition of the country around the world.

Statistics on Small & Cottage Industry of the Country
Bangladesh Econeomic Review 2017

Total Small Industries 1.22 lac
Total Cottage Industries 8.48 lac
Employment at Small and Cottage Industries 37.53 lac

Things to do for the development of Cottage, Small and Medium
Industries:

Cottage industry is mainly family based. But, small and medium size industries
require more labor in addition to the family members. The entrepreneurs of these
types of industry have been contributing a lot for the economic development of
the country by utilizing their own effort, brilliance and locally available raw
materials, Additional steps need to be taken for the development of these types
of industries. These are-

20235
2025

Industries of Bangladesh 99

1. To ensure certainty of availability of raw materials:

Normally, these types of industry flourish at place based on the availability of
raw materials in the locality. But, in many cases the development of the
industry is hindered due to non availability of raw materials for natural
calamities, awful transportation system or any other adverse cause.
Government assistance is necessary for this reason.

2. Market Proximity:

Market is indispensable for sales and marketing of goods and services. More
over, raw materials availability is also dependent on market. There will be
rapid development of these types of industries, if, market for raw materials
and produced goods are ensured.

3. Sufficient Supply of Labor:

Cottage, Small and medium size industries are mainly labor based industries.
For their development efficient worker and cheap labor is necessary. It
becomes obligatory to have knowledge on design and technical issues with
the emergence of demand of the products and services. There should be
sufficient arrangement of training for making the labour force skilled.

4. Transportation Facility:

Though this type of industry is established initially considering local raw
materials and demand of product, with the expansion of market and demand
it is necessary to have a developed transportation facility to aid the sales and
marketing and carrying of raw materials and machineries for the industry.

5. Emphasis on local and foreign, both demands:

Since, small and cottage industries are established with emphasis only on the
local demand, importance is concentrated on local demand only. It should be
kept in mind that we should give importance to the foreign market as well as
emphasizing on local demands.

6. Availability of Capital:

Though the small and cottage industries require small amount of capital, it is
not possible for the entrepreneur of this firms to arrange the required amount
of capital at all time. So, there should be arrangement for bank loan and other
sources of financing.
100 Business Entrepreneurship

7. Government Facility:

Cottage industry is the symbol of pride and tradition for the nation. For this
reason, for its expansion and development, government help and assistance is
necessary. It is a matter of hope that the government is working for the
development of these industries through "Small and Cottage Industries
Corporation". Government has also decided to provide financial assistance to
these industries for their development and expansion. Besides, government is
also taking initiative to protect weaving industry, establishing separate area,
for Benarasi and Jamdani Palli. Special incentive is going to be given to
weavers, blacksmith, potters, bamboo, cane, copper and jute industry, etc.

Activity-2: Prepare a statement visiting some small and medium
industries in your area.

Large Industry

In case of manufacturing concern, large industry means, excluding land and
factory building, having fixed assets including installation cost of Taka 50 crore
and more and engaged number of labor ranging from 300 or more.

In case of Service Industry, Medium Industry means mdustry having asset value
including installation cost of Taka 30 crore or more excluding land and factory
building and worker is more than 120. Among the large industries in
Bangladesh,. Fertilizer, Cement, Paper, Electricity, Garments, Steel,
Engineering, Pharmaceuticals. Jute and Jute goods, Tea, Glass and Glass Tube
industries are mentionable.

Capital 2 no. of workers in Cottage, Small, Medium and Large industry
based on their types.

Importance of large industries in the socio-economic context of
Bangladesh :

Though Bangladesh is an agricultural country, yet industries play a vital

role in economic growth.
Contribution of large industries is increasing day by day in national economy.

Besides for the development of large industries the support from both the private
and the government is increasing. Cheap labourers are available in our country.
Therefore, our country needs such type of large industries where greater number
of employment opportunities will be generated.

£023
Industries of Bangladesh 101

Potential large industries in Bangladesh

* Food Processing Industry

* Manpower Exporting

«Ship Building and Ship Breaking Industry
(Environment Friendly}

* Renewable Energy (Solar Power, Wind Mill)

« Tourism Industry

e ICT Products and ICT based Service

* Ready Made Garments

* Herbal Medicine Industry

* Leather and Leather Goods
Industry

# Hospital and Clinic

« Automobile Industry

* Bio-gas Project

= x Li

= 4M

Dhaka EPZ

Contribution (“) of Industry to Gross Domestic Production (GDP)
(Based in Fiscal year 1995-1996 of Production GDP) By Crore

Type 2008-2009 | 2009-2010 | 2010-2011 | 2011-2012 | 2012-2013
Midium and 41735.0 | 44229.8 |49,069.9 |54,232.3 | 59830.6
large Industry

_% of GDP 12.71% | 12.68% | 13.20% | 13.75% |

Samll and other | 17018.9 | 18340.9 |19411.9 |20664.7 | 22,061.9
industry 5.18% | 5.26% [5.22% | 5.26%

Source: Statistical year book of Bangladesh, BBS, August-2013

Developed and underdeveloped Area

Bangladesh is underdeveloped in industry. The industrialization process is still
very slow because of some problems and obstacles. Firstly, underdeveloped
socio-economic infrastructure such as roads and highways, lack of electricity
and gas, lack of good transport and communication system, lack of technical
knowledge and efficient labor, conflict between labor and owner, labor unrest
etc. are the reasons for obstructing the development of industrialization.
‘a ~- Besides, the whole country is not developed in industry equally at all the place.
& As a result differences are noticed among districts in respect of industrial
102

Business Entrepreneurship

development. As per 2022 Industrial Policy: a list of developed and
underdeveloped district according to industrialization are mentioned. The list is

as follows:
Division Developed District Under Developed District
Dhaka Dhaka, Nurayanygon), : :
Narshingdi and Gazipur, Kishoregonj, Tangail, Rajbari,
Gopalgonj. Shariatpur, Madaripur,
Faridpur, Manikgonj and Munshigonj)
‘Chattogram | Chattogram, Cox*s Bazar,| Khagrachari, ‘Rangamati and
Brahmanbaria, Chandpur,| Bandarban
Cumilla, Feni, Noakhali
and Lakshmipur
Rajshahi Bogura. Pabna Jaipurhat, Naogaon, Chapainowabgonj c
Rajshai, Natore, Sirajgonj
Rangpur Rangpur, Panchagar, Thakurgaon,|
Dinajpur, Nilphamari, Lalmonirhat, |
Kurivram and Gaibandha,
Khulna Jashore Chuadanga, Meherpur, Kushtia, |
Jhinaidah, Magura, WNorail, Satkhira,
Khulna and Bagerhat |
Barishal Barishal, Jhalkathi, Pirojpur, |
Potuakhali, Barguna and Bhola
Sylhet | Sylhet, Sunamgonj, Moulvibazar and
Hobizonj
Mymenshing Jamal!pur, Sherpur, Netrokona,
Mymenshing

Activity-3: Select your own district and find out the reasons for its
being industrially developed or underdeveloped

Name of your district

Industrial Position

Reasons for developed
/underdeveloped in
Industrialization

2025
2025

Industries of Bangladesh 193

EXERCISE

Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)

1. When was the last national “Industrial Policy’ declared?
a. 2019 b. 2020
c. 2021 d. 2022

2. Which of the following is small industry?
a. Industry having 100 nos. of labor
b. Organization having investment of more than 10 crore,
c. Fixed asset installation cost taka 5 lac to taka | crore
d. Industry formed with family members

After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3 & 4:

Mr. Sadif makes various kinds of showpiece with mud with the help of his
family members and sells those in his shop and earns profit. The neighbours of
Mr. Sadif have also been encouraged to form this type of industry.

3. What type of industry of Mr. Sadif is?

a. Small Industry b. Cottage Industry
c. Medium Industry d. Large Industry

4. Mr. Sadif contributes to the national economy-
i. Employment Generation
i. Enhancement of Standard of Living

il. To preserve the tradition of the country
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i& i b. 1 & ill

c. i & iil d.i, i & ii
104 Business Entrepreneurship

Creative Question

1, Rashik established an industry of Jute and Jute Goods with an investment of
Tk.11.00 crore at Fulpur village in Mymenshing district in Dhaka Division
which is a famous place for jute cultivation. His friend Rafi established the same
industry with the same investment in Rajshahi where sugarcane is grown amply.
After a certain period of time Rashik's company made more profit than Rafi.

a. How many types of industry are there in broader sense?
b. What do you understand by service industry? Explain.
c. What ts the type of Mr. Rashik’s industry considering investment? Describe.
d. Analyze the reasons for Rashik’s industry making more profit.
2. Considering the continuous demand for electricity, Ms. Jarin Tasnim of Cox's
Bazar set up a windmill for producing electricity by the sea taking permission
from the government. She supplied the electricity produced from using the sea
wind to different places. Her investment in this industry is more than Taka 3.00
crore.

a. How many types of industry are there on the basis of investment?

b. What do you understand by Cottage Industry’? Explain

c. What is the type of Ms. Jarin’s Industry? Describe.

d. “The economy of the country shall be progressive with the help of Ms.
Jarin’s industry’ — evaluate the statement.

2025
