2025

Chapter Thirteen
Radioactivity and Electronics

! ee

Radioactivity is one of the new topics that have flourished after the emergence
of modern physics at the beginning of twentieth century. Radio activity is
described in this chapter.

Electronics is the main drive of our present civilization- this statement is not
exaggerated at all. The contribution of physics behind the present electronics has
been discussed in this chapter, and the instruments that have changed our lives
completely have been introduced .
348

Physics

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

explain radioactivity.

explain the characteristics of alpha, beta and gamma rays.
describe the sequential development of electronics.
differentiate between analogue and digital electronics.
explain semiconductors and integrated circuits.

2025
2025

Radioactivity and Electronics 349

13.1 Radioactivity

We all know, there is a nucleus at the center of an atom, and there are protons and
neutrons in the nucleus. The number of revolving electrons around the nucleus
is equal to the number of protons in it. The radius of the nucleus is about one
lakh times smaller than the radius of the atom. But the actual mass of the atom is
the mass of its nucleus even though its size is small, because the mass of the
electron is 1836 times less than that of the proton or neutron.

A proton is positively charged, so the nucleus cannot be formed only with
protons because the protons will be thrown off due to strong repulsion force. So
there is charge-less neutrons with protons in the nucleus, and nuclei become
stable due to very strong nuclear force between neutrons and protons. Though
there is only one proton at the center of a normal hydrogen atom, there are also
hydrogen nuclei with one or two neutrons.

With the increase of the number of protons, to keep this nucleus stable, the
number of neutrons also increases. But when the proton number exceeds 82,
the nucleus starts to become unstable. But, no stable isotope is found for
Technetium (43) and Promethium (61).These unstable nuclei try to become stable
by emitting a kind of radiation. We call this process radioactivity. The radiation
that comes out from the nucleus is called a radioactive ray.

It is not the fact that when proton number exceeds 82 (atomic number more than 82)
only then the nucleus becomes radioactive. Any nucleus of other atoms may be
radioactive too. We have classified atoms on the basis of their electron number
which is equal to the number of protons. External properties, nature, chemical
properties; every feature of an element depends on the classification of
electrons. So the number of neutrons of an atom can be different even if the
number of electrons and protons is equal. These types of elements, with different
numbers of neutrons, are called isotopes of that element. So, an isotope of an
element may be stable, but another isotope of that element may be unstable or
radioactive. For example, we can say that element carbon in whose nucleus there
are six protons and its three isotopes are:
350 Physics

C,,: 6 protons and 6 neutrons
C,,: 6 protons and 7 neutrons

Ci: 6 protons and 8 neutrons

Among these three isotopes, C,, is unstable or radioactive.

In 1896, Henry Becquerel discovered the existence of radioactive rays from
Uranium for the first time. Later on, Ernest Rutherford, Pierre Curie, Marie
Curie and other scientists discovered radioactivity of other elements. Since
radioactivity it is not influenced by external pressure, heat, electric or magnetic
field, and cannot be controlled, it is accepted as a nuclear phenomenon. Due to
radioactivity, radioactive rays emerge and this changes the structure of the
nucleus and turn it into a different element, this is also observed.

The main three radioactive rays that emit from the nucleus are alpha, beta and
gamma rays (Figure 13.01).

13.1.1 Alpha ray

Alpha ray or alpha particle is actually a helium nucleus. A helium nucleus
contains two protons and two neutrons, so it is a charged particle. So its path of
motion can be influenced by electric and magnetic field. When an alpha particle
emits from a nucleus, it possesses some MeV of energy, so when it passes
through air and collides with the molecule -atoms it can ionize them intensively.
In air, the path of motion of an alpha particle is straight. Since an alpha particle
is a helium nucleus, it cannot travel far through air. It loses its energy by
ionizing air molecule-atoms ans travels approximately 6 cm through air before
stopping. An alpha particle can be stopped by using a sheet of paper. It creates
phosphorescence on zinc sulfide screen. An alpha particle creates many free
electrons by ionizing molecule-atoms of air in its path of motion. Its presence
can be detected or its energy can be measured easily by collecting these free
electrons.

When a alpha particle comes out from a larger radioactive nucleus then this
nucleus’s atomic number will be reduced by two and its nucleon number will be
reduced by four, because an alpha particle consists of two protons and two

2025
2025

Radioactivity and Electronics 351

neutrons. For example: an isotope of uranium turns into thorium by emitting an
alpha particle.
pm Un3g —> Thy3q + He,”

The atomic number of uranium is 92 and thorium is 90, It is notable that number
of electrons of an atom is not significant. Radioactive nuclei of atoms can
easily give up or receive extra electrons to and from its surroundings.

alpha ray . ~~
——$—= + ira

beta ray re
gamma ray _—

ini lead
paper —_! igen eis
Figure 13.01: It is possible to stop an alpha particle by a single sheet of paper,
because it can lose its energy by too much ionizing. It is necessary to stop beta ray or
electrons using an aluminum sheet of a few millimeter thick. A thick lead sheet is
needed to stop gamma ray.

13.1.2 Beta ray

A Beta particle is actually an electron (it is of courise a matter of wonder that a
nucleus is consists of neutrons and protons only, so how does an electron come
out from a nucleus?) For this, inside the nucleus a neutron has to dissociate into
a proton and an electron.

n> ptte + 9

That is, a charge-less neutron is converted into a positively charged proton and a
negatively charged electron, so the total amount of charge remains unchanged.
In the right side of the equation, ( Vy) indicates the anti particle of a neutrino
(anti-neutrino), a mysterious particle of the world of physics, which is
chargeless and its mass is very small.
352 Physics

When an alpha particle is emitted from a nucleus, it comes out with a definite
amount of energy. But in the case of a beta particle, this is not true. The energy
of the beta particle depends on the part of the total energy radiation received by
the anti-neutrino.

Since a beta particle is negatively charged electron, it can be influenced by
electric and magnetic field. When it passes through matter, it can ionize the
molecule-atoms of the matter due to collision with them. Since the size of a beta
particle is much smaller than that of an alpha particle (helium nucleus), its
penetrating capability is more than the alpha particle and it can penetrate deeper
into matter. It is possible to stop a normal beta particle by a few millimeter thick
aluminum sheet.

When radiation of beta particles occurs, a proton is increased in the nucleus by
deducting of a neutron. So the number of nucleons remains the same. As the
atomic number depends on the number of protons, the atomic number of the
nucleus increases, and hence a different nucleus of a different element is formed.
For example: radioactive C,, is converted into N_, due to beta radiation:

C14 > Ny +e + Vv (anti-neutrino)

An interesting matter is that, not only the emission of electrons is beta radiation
from inside the nucleus; the emission of an anti-particle of electron (positron) is
also called beta radiation. For this reason, a proton has to be converted into
the neutron inside the nucleus:

pt > n° + é++ vy (neutrino)
(This reaction cannot take place outside the nucleus. This is because the mass of
a neutron is more than that of a proton.)

In this process, the number of protons decreases by one and hence the atomic
number also decreases by one, and a nucleus of different element is formed.

Though neutrinos or anti-neutrinos are emitted during beta radiation, they are
not considered to be radioactive rays. This is because they are charge less and
they are so inert (or nonreactive) that even a few light years thick lead sheet
cannot stop a neutrino particle.

13.1.3 Gamma ray

A gamma ray is actually an energetic electromagnetic wave. It has no charge, but
as it is strong, its wavelength is very low (frequency is very high). Regardless of
the energy of the gamma ray, its velocity is equal to that of light. When a nucleus

2025
Radioactivity and Electronics 353

becomes excited by radiating alpha or beta particle then extra energy comes out
as gamma ray and the nucleus de-excites. A gamma ray is charge less and mass
less, so the atomic number or nucleon number of a nucleus does not change due
to this radiation.

Since gamma ray doesn’t have any charge, so it cannot be influenced by an
electric or magnetic field. Because it is charge less, it cannot directly ionize
atoms or molecules, but the electrons can ionize atoms or molecules in different
processes and from that we can understand the presence of gamma ray. To stop
gamma rays with energy equal to that of alpha and beta particles, a thick layer of
lead of several centimeters is needed.

13.1.4 Half Life

It is not possible to say the exact moment when a definite radioactive nucleus
will emit radioactive rays. Physics can only predict the probability of its
radiation. So the concept of Half Life is used to determine the amount of
radioactivity. The time in which half of the nucleus disintegrates (or radiates) is
known as half life. Therefore, the more the radioactivity of an element, the less
its half life is. The half life of a stable nucleus having no radioactivity can be
considered to be “infinity”.

It is necessary to know that radioactivity is a nuclear phenomenon, so a nucleus
is transformed into another through radioactive emission. A different nucleus
can accept or donate one or two electrons from the surroundings to become a
charge less atom. This is because the energy of the electrons of an atom is much
smaller than the nuclear energy of a nucleus.

Example

Question: The half life of a radioactive element of 1 kg is 100 years. What will be
its mass after 200 years?

Answer: Mass does not change directly due to radioactivity. Only three fourth
of the nuclei of the radioactive element will emit radioactive particles in 200
years.

Forma-45, Physics, Class 9-10
354 Physics

13.1.5 Uses of Radioactivity

There are many different uses of Radioactivity. If a small amount of
radioactive sample is inserted into the body, information about the body
can be detected by observing the movement of the radioactive sample from
outside the body. Generally those radioactivity samples have a very low
half life, it may a few minutes, thus the radioactivity of the samples will be
finished within an hour.

Another important use of radioactivity is the determination of the age of
ancient fossils. In our body there is huge amount of carbon in which a
definite amount of C,, is present. When an animal dies, no more C,, can
enter the body further. The amount of carbon deposited before gets less due
to the half life. Thus knowing the amount of C,, that would have normally
been present initially, and by calculating the amount which is decayed, age
can be determined accurately.

A radioactive element can cause harm to the cells of the body, so different
types of caution are taken. Radioactivity is used to destroy harmful cells
within the body. This is why, for the treatment of cancer radioactive
elements are used to destroy cancer cells.

Radioactivity is also used to make the equipment germ free, detecting the
presence of smoke and determining the amount of different metals in
minerals.

13.1.6 Cautions about Radioactivity

A high radioactive dose can cause many
problems in our body. When research started
about radioactivity, the scientists did not
know the bad effects of radioactivity. As a
result, scientists were attacked with many
diseases as they came close contact with
radioactivity. Due to working for a long time
with radioactive elements Marie Curie suffered.
from leukemia and died. Radioactivity
decreases immunity against disease,
preventing capability of human and even
physical disable children are born inherently. Figure 13.02: Radioactive materials

We do not usually face radioactivity often are used very carefully because they

in our daily life. Due to new are very dangerous.

2025
2025

Radioactivity and Electronics 355

technology in the world, many people have started to face the bad effects of
radioactivity. The nuclear reactions in a nuclear power plant produce serious
radioactivity. Many radioactive wastes have high half life and can remain
radioactive for lakhs of years. There are even incidents of radioactive wastes
being spread into the surroundings due to accidents in nuclear power plants.
Many people faced radioactivity in the accident of a submarine run by nuclear
energy. The most devastating event took place in Hiroshima and
Nagasaki due to nuclear bombs. Many people were exposed to radioactivity.
So, many researchers have been started becoming concerned about radioactivity
and the determination of the safe limit of radioactivity is also started. General
people are now being warned about the effects of radioactivity (figure 13.02).

13.2 Development of Electronics

Electronics has a greatest contribution in the development of the modern
civilization and it is not an exaggeration by any means. The gradual
development of electronics can be divided into three parts, the vacuum tube,
transistor and integrated circuit.

13.2.1 Vacuum Tube

In 1883 Edison observed that in a light bulb, a current can flow through a
vacuum space from the filament to a metal plate. This process is known as the
Edison Effect. In 1904, John Flemming (on the basis of the Edison effect) first
created a vacuum tube with two electrodes, which worked as a rectifier i.e., it
converted an alternating current into a direct current. This vacuum tube is
considered as the introduction to electronics. At that time the exchange of
information was started by radio waves. Guglielmo Marconi needed such type of
vacuum tube to control of the radio waves. (It is noted that Marconi was
mentioned as the inventor of radio, but in recent times the contribution of
Bengali scientist Jagadish Chandra Bose is also acknowledged.)

In 1906 Lee De Forest invented another vacuum tube by adding a third
electrode, which is known by the name triode. This triode can control the flow

of electricity and used as an amplifier.

The development of vacuum tubes take place first through telegraph
356 Physics

Figure 13.03 : Types of vacuum tube

communication using Morse code and then through the use of vocal
communication by telephone (Figure 13.03). During the first and second world
war, different types of specialized vacuum tubes were used in controlling weap-
ons, radar, navigation etc. In 1946 the first computer ENIAC was invented using
1800 vacuum tubes.

13.2.2 Transistor

In 1947 the Transistor was first invented in Bell Laboratory and for this
invention John Bardeen, Walter Brattain and William Shockley were awarded
the Nobel Prize. No one could imagine at that time how fast and widely the
transistor would change the whole world.

A transistor can work just like a vacuum tube, but compared with a vacuum tube
it is very small in size, light in weight, and a very small amount of electricity is
needed to operate it, it is very reliable and most of all, it can be made at a very
low cost. Thus it rapidly secured its place, replacing the vacuum tube and the
people of the world began to get many electrical appliances by using this
transistor at very cheap.

13.2.3 Integrated Circuit

Although the discussion about an integrated circuit was started in 1952, a real
integrated circuit was started to be made in the sixth decade. In the fifth decade
many transistors were made on a thin silicon plate (Wafer) and eventually the
transistors were separated by cutting them from the plate. This process was
improved to a small extent while preparing an integrated circuit. Not only

2025
2025

Radioactivity and Electronics 357

a transistor but also creating a diode, resistor and a capacitor on a wafer, a
complete circuit was started to be made. This circuit was named an integrated
circuit (IC). With the development of technology many transistors were
assembled in a small area, and first it was named Large Scale Integration (LSD,
and then it is called Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI). These circuits were
made into a ready-made package so that they could be directly used in a circuit
board. Modern equipment such as the Micro-computer, clinical appliances,
video camera, communication satellite would never be possible without the use
of integrated circuits.

13.2.4 Electronics of Future

The technology of electronics is still advancing, and in the future we will
experience electronic circuits using optics or light in an information
communicative integrated circuit. At the same time we will observe the use of
programmable IC (FPGA: Field Programmable Gate Array) in different fields in
accordance to our own needs.

13.3 Analog and Digital Electronics

Things that are happening around us every moment, like sound, light, pressure,
temperature are expressed as information or data. Their values can be changed
continuously. We might need these values in our different works, so we preserve
and analyze these values and send them from one place to another. To process
the data we might use electronics. This continuously changing data can be
converted into electrical signals and these types of signals are called analog
signals. If we process these signals with a type of electronics, it is called analog
electronics.When discrete signals are processed, then it is called digital signal.

Continuously changing information or data signals can be processed in a
different way. To do this, we have to find the value for a definite interval of time
and express this in a type of number. Then we have to preserve this value
successively. Then we will be able to process these numbers using electronics.
When it is needed to convert this into the main analog signal again, then electric
signals of equal to serially preserved values have to be created. We use decimal
358 Physics

numbers in our daily life. But in electronics numbers are expressed by binary
numbers, because they can be easily processed (voltage as 1 and zero voltage as
0). The number system expressed with the digits ‘0’ and ‘1’ is a binary number

system. (Figure. 13.04)

The greatest contribution of electronics is the computer. The exchange of all data
or processing of all data in a computer is processed by digital electronics. Digital
electronics is also used in the internet and computer networks to exchange data.
Sound, image or video etc. start as analog signals (and is used as analog signal
too) but they are stored, processed and sent as digital signal. Noise can spoil the
quantity of analog signals very easily by entering the signals. Once it is
converted into digital signals, noise cannot enter it very easily. So, the quality of
digital signals remains unchanged.

Figure 13.04: (a) Analog and (b) Digital signals

A special type of IC is made to process digital signals. These IC’s have become
efficient gradually. That is, they can process a large number of signals at a very
short time accurately. Therefore, as time goes by, the process of digitizing is
becoming easier and it is needless to say that everything around us is being
converted into digital world.

2025
2025

Radioactivity and Electronics 359

13.4 Semiconductor

The modern world and modern civilization have been built on the basis of
electronics. If we want to express our gratitude to any substance, that
substance will be the semiconductor. We have discussed about the conductor,
insulator and semiconductor. Now we can go deeper to a small extent about this
subject.

oo?

LN
pontoon te

h

=

otenextenten'
goo0o

Goac

Figure 13.05 : Silicon crystal. Three dimentional silicon crystal (right)

aie,

i=

In Figure 13.05 many atoms of a semiconductor have been shown side by side.
Due to the structure of the atom if there are eight electrons in their outer most
shells, in one sense they are fulfilled and become very stable. Atoms always try
to have eight electrons in their outer most shells. Silicon is the most used
semiconductor among the semiconductors. The number of electrons is four in its
outer most shell. But when we observe a silicon crystal, we find surprisingly that
there are eight electrons in the outer most shell of every atom! It has happened
because every atom attaches to four different atoms around it, and they are all
using their electrons sharing with the neighboring atoms. (We have drawn the
figure on a plane. The real arrangement of silicon atoms is three dimensional, as
shown at the right side of the Figure 13.05. Actually, every atom touches other
four atoms.)
