CHAPTER TWELVE
Lessons to learn from the Lives of
Successful Entrepreneurs

Though from the time beyond remembrance, the industry and commerce in our
country has been bearing rich tradition and pride. its contribution to the
economic development is not so bright. A few Bengal is name become
successful in business before independence. Mainly, the Bengalis got the fullest
opportunity for doing business afier the Liberation War in 1971. During the last
40 years, several entrepreneurs have proven their superiority in business
entrepreneurship with starting business in smaller scale and now their businesses
have been contributing significantly to the socio-economic development of the
country. In this chapter, we shall discuss the lives of some successful
entrepreneurs including two most reputed figures in the business arena of
Bangladesh: Mr. Jahurul Islam and Mr, Samson H. Chowdhury, We, all shall be
motivated from their lives and activities.

After reading this chapter, we shall be able to —

e Describe the important aspect of the lives of Mr. Jahurul Islam and Samson
H. Chowdhury

e Describe the business organization formed by Mr. Jahurul Islam and
Samson H. Chowdhury

* Mention the names of the Companies and social and public welfare
related activities of Mr. Jahurul Islam and Samson H. Chowdhury

e Describe the story of Mr. Jahurul Islam and Samson H. Chowdhury;
of becoming entrepreneur.

« Identify the learning aspects from the lives of the entrepreneurs

e Make report on the local successful entrepreneurs

2025
2025

Lessons Learned [rom the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 15]

Jahurul Islam (1928 -1995)

One of the most successful entreprencurs in Bangladesh is Mr. Jahurul Islam. He
is one of the most reputed figures in the arena of business, industries and
commerce of Bangladesh after the independence. He had the qualities like
business talent, hard work, visionary and creativeness. He was born at the
vallage of Bhagalpur, in Bajitpur upazila in Kishoregonj district in 1928. His
father Late Aftab Uddin was normal contractor in Mymensing District Board,
His mother's name is Mrs. Rahima Akhter Khatun. He was second among his
five brothers and three sisters. His uncle was the Oversheer of Kolkata Power
Development Board. He completed primary education from the local primary
school and went to the Sorarchor Shibnath High School for his secondary level
education. Then he took admission at Bajitpur High School. After some times,
he went to Kolkata with his uncle Mr. Murshed Uddin. He completed
Matriculation from the Ripon High School of Kolkata. He attended the LA.
exam from the Horogonga College of Musnshigonj in 1948, but could not pass
it. His formal education came to an end because of adverse surroundings and
responsibilities and liabilities of his family, He joined the C & B Department as
an Work Sarker with salary of only taka seventy seven to remove the financial
insolvency of the family. Later, he was promoted to the post of Lower Division
Clark of the same department. He was influenced by his uncle's job and father’s
business as a contractor, After two and half years in 1951, he left the job and
enlisted himself as a third class contractor. He established a company named
Bengal Development Corporation Limited and fully started his business with a
capital of only 3/4 thousand taka. His hard work and sole attention to the
business and cordial attitude gradually made him a successful entrepreneur and
one of the richest persons in the country. At the very beginning of his life as a
contractor, he completed the construction of Kishorgonj Post Office.
Afterwards, he did the road construction from Gulistan to Tikatuli in Dhaka,
152 Business Entrepreneurship

Because of honesty in the business and quality of his works, he became second
class and subsequently first class contractor by 1953. He was interested in all
types of construction. He had investment in Housing, Roads, Bridge, Irrigation
System, Sanitation etc. He used to acquire knowledge form his works and
applied them in his subsequent works. With his visionary power, he realized that
the surrounding area of Dhaka city shall get populated and the demand for the
land shall increase. For this reason, he bought vast area of land in Dhaka,
Mirpur, Savar, Joydevpur and Kaliakoir, He used those land for setting up
industries and housing. Day by day, the value of his investment was increasing
with the increase of land value. During 1960. he established a timber factory at
Chattogram anda glass factory at Gingira in Dhaka. He established a housing
company named Eastern Housing Limited in 1964 to meet up the increasing
demand for the residential purpose, the company is now one of the renowned
name in the housing industry of the country. All the companies are known as
Islam Group of Companies which was established in 1965. The group includes
Eastern Housing Ltd., Navana Ltd., Millners Limited, Essential Products
Limited, Dhaka Fibres Limited, Crescent International Limited, Navana Sports
Limited, Dhaka Re-Rolling Mills Ltd. Aftab Automobiles Limited, Aftab Dairy
Limited etc. People more than one lac are working in various organization
established by him.

Hard work, honesty, sincerity and confidence all these qualitics made him a
successful man. The identity of this extraordinary son of Bengal is not limited to
as an industrialist. le was a social reformer, successful organizer and model of
efficient manager. All his achievement was possible because of his hard work
and sincerity. Not only investment and employment generation, but also his
activities of social responsibility covered various contribution to the society
including education. health, food, banking, agriculture and sports. He
established many shelters for the destitute, institutions for kids, madrasa and
school. 350 bed Jahurul Islam Medical College & Hospital established by him at
Bajitpur is the largest private medical college in Bangladesh. Besides,
establishing Nursing Training Institute and Jahurul Islam Education Complex is
his worthy deeds. He had also contributed in many ways to the great Liberation
War in 1971. The hfe of this work hero ended on 19th October 1995,

2025
Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 153

Jahurul Islam Medical College & Hospital, Bajitpur, Kishoregonj

Activity-1 : Identify the characteristics of the successful entrepreneur Mr. Jahurul
Islam which have attracted you and how you will practise those in your life?
Special qualities of — successful | Ways to practice those in own life
entrepreneur Mr. Jahurul Islam

* Ld]
* s
* LJ

Samson H. Chowdhury (1925-2012)

Public well wisher and the Chairman of the Square Group, Samson H.
Chowdury is the unforgettable name in the history of industry and commerce of
Bangladesh. He was born on 25th September, 1925 in the Gopalganj District. He is
the son of E.H. Chowdhury and Latika Chowdhury. His father was a medical
officer of outdoor dispensary. He studied from 1930 to 1940 in the Bishnupur
High School in Kolkata. He attained Senior Cambridge Degree from there.
Then, he obtained Diploma in Management from the Harvard University

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma- 30
154 Business Entrepreneurship

School. After finishing his studies, he got back to his village Ataikula in Pabna,
From the very boyhood, he was involved with various medicines because of his
fathers profession. After thinking a lot, he decided to take the business of
pharmacy or medicine shop as a profession. He started a small shop in the village
market. The time was 1952. In 1958, he got the license to set up medicine
factory. He, along with his three other friends providing Tk.20,000 each; with
capital of total taka 80,000.00 and 12 workers, they established ‘Square
Pharmaceuticals Limited’. The first medicine produced in their factory was
blood refining ‘Aston Syrup'. They had to purchase raw materials from the local
importer at a very high price. They never compromised with quality. Only
because of the quality of the medicine, the doctors used to prescribe it. At that
time, their medicine became more demanding than that of the reputed firms. He
dreamed of square to be a large company, With this dream in mind, he advanced
forward against all the odds gradually, capitalizmg his immense zeal and
courage. His small initiative has now turned into vast Square Group of Industries
due to his hard work, honesty and discipline. At present, approximately 30000
workers are employed there. Not only medicine, this group has expanded its
business to cosmetics, textile, agro based products, technology, healthcare,
media, etc. Products of Square have spread all over the world. The quality of the
product is acknowledged both in home and abroad. The medicine of Square is
being exported to 50 countries. He was the Chairman of MasRanga Television,
one of the reputed private television channels in the country. Besides, he was the
Chairman of the Metropolitan Chamber and Society of Medicine Industry. He
was also involved with the International Chamber and Commerce, Bangladesh.
Showa Odhikary has written about him "He was the owner-manager, accountant,
typist, clerk, worker and medical representative in a row". There is no work that
he has not performed. He untiringly moved around the market, towns, cities,
ports of the country for marketing his medicine. Now, Square is a proud name
after passing many ups and downs over the period. Square Group had been
selected as the Best Tax Payer for the year 2009- 2010 by the National Board of
Revenue.

Various products manufactured by square are used in every home. The product
of square has been adored in both home and abroad due to its standard,
competitive price, quality and discipline in work, The addiction of creativity has
made Samson H. Chowdhury a successful industrialist and triumphant
entrepreneur, With his untiring effort and passion, he established industries one
after another. At present, among different stitutions of Square Group: the

20235
2025

Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 155

mentionable names are Square Pharmaceuticals, Square Toiletries, Square
Textiles, Square Holdings, Square Spinning, Square Consumer Products, Square
Knit Fabrics, Square Fashions, Square Herbal and Naturals. Square Hospitals,
etc. This entrepreneur has mentioned patience, perseverance and honesty as the
basis for his success in interviews with different media. He believed that highest
level of values and practice of ethics has put Square to the trust of people. He
thought that the key to success was the smooth relation and combined effort of
the worker and entrepreneur. There was never any labor umest in the organiza-
tion of this labor friendly entrepreneur. The life of this great active person ended
on 5th January 2012 at the age of 86 years. His spouse name is Anika
Chowdhury. His three sons Tapan Chowdbury, Anjon Chowdhury, Swapan
Chowdhury are established in their own business.

The famous Annoda Govinda library at Pabna patronized by Samson
H, Chowdhury

Awards and Acknowledgement

In 2010, government declared 42 persons as Commercially Important Person
-CIP for their contribution in establishing industry, production, employment
generation and contribution to the increase of national income through private
sector. Samson H. Chowdhury was one of the eighteen large groups of
industries. He was awarded "Business Man of the Year' by the Daily Star and
DHL in 2000 and "Business Executive of the Year' in 1998 by the American
Chamber of Commerce.
136 Business Entrepreneurship

Activity-2 : Identify the characteristics of the successful entrepreneur Mr.
Samson H. Chowdhury which have attracted you and how you will practice
those in your life?

Special qualities of successful | Ways to practice those in own life
entrepreneur = Mr. Samson —-H,
Chowdhury

a a

e *

Shahida Begum- Entrepreneur from Housewife (Intrepreneur)

Shahida Begum is the proprietress of Liberty Gents Tailors in Barishal. She
started her business out of necessity, not from hobby or planning. She never
thought of doing something like this. She did not have the experience too. When
she started the business she faced a lot of difficulties. But strong determination
and hard work has brought her success and honor. She started to make cloths for
men and is still doing it. Shahida Begum has been residing im Barishal. Her days
were passing peacefully with her four daughter and husbands' tailoring business.
But, suddenly her husband became sick. He passed away in 1997 leaving them
to survive alone. j ——

Shahida Begum was blinded with shock as to, how she will manage the coming
days? What will be the future of her daughters? She knew nothing except the
household jobs. She does not understand business either The condition of her
husband's Gents Tailors near Barishalsacdar hospital was not good. All their
savings was depleted because of her husband's sickness for many days. A little
amount of ornaments was her last resort. She started the business with 50000
taka by selling her ornaments, Then, there were only two worker in the shop. She
learmed tailoring from them.

£023
2025

Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 137

At first, the gents customer, family members and relatives; no body took this
positively. But, she did not lose hope. She formed a modem gents tailor by
controlling all odds with her strong determination and confidence. In this way,
she became a business entrepreneur from a housewife. She received an award as
a successful women entrepreneur in 2008 from the SME Foundation.

Abul Kalam Azad: Owner of Azad Products

The fist business he started was with a capital of four hundred and fifty taka.
Gradually the business became a large organization. At present, he is the owner
of 'Agad Products’ the famous organization of the country. His name is Abul
Kalam Azad. It is the time of 1970. After the SSC exam, he went to market with
his father to buy Hilsha Fish and Jack Fruit in exchange of Jute. He found there
a way of making profit by selling coconut and with the help of his cousin and
capital of taka 450; he started the business. This was the turning point of his life.
He used a small boat to carry coconut from one market to another. After a period,
he migrated to the city to do something more. The struggling life began. All
round the day, he used to walk by the road and dream. He found a way too. He
saw a person selling poster in front of Baitul Mokarram and got an idea. After
collecting necessary materials, he started 'Azad Poster House' a very smaller size
business. He used to sell poster by hanging them on post in front of the L.
Rahman Jewelers. Some people mocked at this and some body encouraged.
After huge effort, he managed to make poster and view card of the hero and
heroine of TV and cinema. The general people of the country accepted the
#littering poster of the famous stars. After this, he never had to look back. The
floating shop has been tured in to a large organization Azad Products, Abul
Kalam Azad says that his hard work and blessing [rom his mother has made him
158 Business Entrepreneurship

successful. For this reason, to show honor to all the mother of the world, he has
started 'Rotnogorva Ma Award’ since 2003. This award is given to those mother
having at least three established daughter or sons. One of the objectives of this
award is to create awareness among mothers. The award giving ceremony is
arranged every year on ‘World Mother's Day’.

Lutfa Sunjida: Successful Entrepreneur in a Careworn Life

(Intrepreneur)

The owner of the Aunindya Boutique and Parlour at Halishahar in the port
city Chattogram is Lutfa Sunjida; Who started her business with taka fifteen
thousand only and now has enlisted her name in the list of millionaires. She has
established the boutique and the parlor steadily with strong determination and
patience. To struggle is the main principle of her life. Without continuous effort,
it would not be possible for her to reach the present situation by any means.
When there were any problems, she overcame those with patience and hard
labor. She had to join part time job when she was a candidate for SSC exam in
1988. She used to make baby cloths and Punjabi and sell them to the local
market. She opened a showroom at Chawkview Super Market in 1989 by
borrowing thirty thousand taka from her cousin. That was the turning point of
her life. Sales of the shop was satisfactory from the very beginning. She opened
another showroom at Chattogram Shopping Complex by availing loan of fifty
thousand taka from Chattogram Midas. Her business was booming. Her family
started to become solvent. In 2004, she started a Beauty Parlor. Support from her
organization ‘Anindya', hard work of the workers and spontaneous presence of
ihe buyers have encouraged her to step forward.

“= ’ A
As a part of carrying out social responsibility of business, she always tried to
stand by the poor and destitute. She tries to generate employment through
providing free training for handicapped women, women, abandoned by hus-
bands and oppressed women. She will advance to long ways with her 'Anindya’
along with her other dreams to fulfill.

2025
2025

Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 139

Nayeb Ali of Bagura

The young man from Bagura, Nayeb Ali has proved that it is possible to improve
ones own fate with the help of hard labor. talent and small amount of capital
despite of having severe [rustration and suffermgs. Nayeb Ali was cheated by a
manpower businessman on his attempt to change his fate from going abroad by
selling his lands and borrowing from others which left him helpless. Nayeb Ali
a 27 year old young man from Horihara village of Nandigram Upazila of Bagura
district went abroad by borrowing more than lac taka from the village Samity.
When he was helpless from loosing everything, he dreamt of living a new
life. He had a little learning but he decided to do something on his own in his
village with the help of his patience and merit. His friend Mizanur Rahman and
other members of his family extended their support favoring him. Most of the
part of their village has canal, ponds and water reservoir. Considering this
natural element, Nayeb Ali decided to rear duck. He bought 30 ducklings from a
nearby village. With only one thousand taka capital he established a duck farm
in his village in 2009. Though, people used to mock at him for losing money for
his abroad mission, within six month he proved himself as an ideal duck farmer
in the locality. Working every moment in his farm, he won over poverty. He also
proved that it is possible to be self-dependent by just farming of duck. In this
way, he became not only a remarkable figure of the locality but also their light
of hope. At present, he is the owner of a farm of 1000 ducks. His ducks give
more eggs because of supportive environment and natural food. He refunded all
the borrowed money for going abroad and also bought some pieces of land. With
the expansion of his farm, he appointed two more workers. Because of this farm,
ten more people have got the opportunity for earning through selling feed, snails
and eggs. To see his success, many people of this locality have been engaged in
duck farming. Nayeb Ali has a dream that his village shall be a remarkable one
in self-employment. This is to be attained through proper training about poultry
farming.

Activity-3 : Identify the characteristics of a successful entrepreneur in
the mentioned four persons
Shahida Begum Abul Kalam Azad

150 Business Entrepreneurship

Lutfa Sunjida Nayeb Ali
. .
* .
. .

Preparing Report on Successful Entrepreneur at Local Level

The contribution of the entrepreneur for the economic development of the
country is very significant. There are many entrepreneurs who started their
business in smaller scale and later turned to large businessman through their hard
work, perseverance and creativity. We can learn about them in many ways. But
many remain unknown. Use the following format to prepare report on the local
successful entrepreneur anc submit it te the class. You may invite them to the
class with help of your teacher at a feasible time to learn about their success story
so that you can be motivated from them.

Chart to prepare the report

Name and Address of the Entrepreneur:

Back Ground of Starting the Business: (How he started the business, What
was his motivation, what obstacles he had to overcome)

His First Business:

Initial Capital:

List of established Companies/Firms: (Sequenced by formation year)

Reason for becoming successful:

Description of participation in Social Activities:

Advice for the students of Business Entrepreneurship as the next generation
entreprencurs:

2025
Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 161

EXERCISE

Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)

1. Who is the founder of ‘Bengal Development Corporation Ltd.?

a. Jahurul Islam b, Samson H. Chowdhury

c. Abul Kalam Azad d. Lutfa Sunjida

2, What is entrepreneurship?

a. Initial effort to start a job
b. Initiative to set up a business
¢. Activities related to marketing products.

d. Financing for the business

After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3
& 4:

Mr. Shadman is an established businessman. He spent ten lac taka to set up a
school in his own village to increase the literacy rate. Fifty teacher and staffs got
appointed in that school. For this reason, his goodwill will increase.

3, Out of what kind of responsibility Mr. Shadman established the school?

a. Social b. State

c. Personal d. familial

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-21
162 Business Entrepreneurship

4. Entrepreneurs like Mr. Shadman contributes for the development of the
country-

i. by creating employment

ii. by enhancing the standard of living
iu. by developing the infrastructure of the village

Which one of the following is correct?
a. i & ti b. i & iil
c. ii & iii d. i, tt & tii

Creative Question

1. Mr. Ishrak joined a pharmaceutical company as a medical representative after
passing M.com. He did not like the rules of the job and working under
somebody else and left the job to start his own medicine business. Later on
with his labor, honesty and sincerity, he established a pharmaceutical
company named 'Raj Pharma’.

a. Who is the founder of Square Pharmaceuticals?

b. What do you understand by risk? Explain.

ce. Which characteristics of entrepreneurship helped Ishrak to be an
entrepreneur?

d. Evaluate multi dimensional characteristics of Ishrak by establishing
Raj Pharma.

2. Shyamol of Kalikochcho village simply started his business with a floating
shop.He gradually established the business by working hard through day and
night. Always smiling Shyamol never retreated to weariness. His dutifulness
of daily life impressed every body of his locality. Now, he is a reputed
businessman of the area. He is also helpful towards religious and social
activities.

a. Which year was Eastern Housing established?

b. What do you understand by Commercially Important Person -CIP? explain,
Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 163

c. What quality of entrepreneurship has made Shyamol a successful
businessman? Analyze,

d. “To participate in the religious and social activities is a great virtue of

an entrepreneur” — evaluate the statement on the basis of the paragraph
mentioned above

The End
