CHAPTER TWO
Business Entrepreneurship and
Entrepreneur

For the economic development of a country the role of entrepreneurship and
entrepreneur is very important. The active participation of the entrepreneur is
the basis of the economic affluence and development of the developed countries
of the modern world. They are contributing through using the natural resources
as well as human resources of the country along with their creativity. In a
country like Bangladesh that has a huge population the role of entrepreneurship
and entrepreneur in economic development and in creating employment is
undeniable. In this chapter we will know about the various aspects of Business
entreprencurship, importance of business entrepreneurship for socio economic
development, features of a successful entrepreneur and details of removing
constraints of entrepreneurship development.

After completing this chapter, we shall be able to

e [Explain the concept and features of entrepreneurship and business entrepreneurship

® Differentiate between entrepreneurship and business entrepreneurship

« Describe the features and activities of business entrepreneurship

* Identify the attributes of a successful entrepreneur,

e Explain the importance of entrepreneurship in socio economic development
of Bangladesh

e Relate between business entrepreneurship and risk

e Describe the development of positive environment for business
entrepreneurship

* Identify the obstacles in Bangladesh for development of business
entrepreneurship.

* Identify the ways to remove the obstacles in Bangladesh for development
of business entrepreneurship.

2025
2025

Business Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneur 15

Entrepreneurship and Business Entrepreneurship

In Your school, the Victory Day on 16th December is celebrated every year by
arranging some kind of functions. The Victory day of this year is almost near to
us. One of you has proposed that this year a drama can be staged. He also said
that he will give all kinds of help regarding the staging of the play. Staging a play
is an arduous and creative job. In this case, selection of drama, characters, place
and time was fixed affer discussion. One of you came forward with the idea of
staging a play, this is one kind of entrepreneurship.In general sense any kind of
work effort initiative can be termed as entrepreneurship. So, entrepreneurship
can be on anything .

One more example can be given- a kind hearted person is setting up a school for
creating educational opportunity for the boys and girls of your area. He
established the school from his own savings and collecting funds from other
people. This is the result of his strong determination and entrepreneurship. In
this way, all kinds of work of public welfare like establishing school, college,
hospital and club etc. are the results of some one's entrepreneurship.

Any kind of business is the outcome of the initiative of an individual or a group.
Business entrepreneurship is identifying the business concept, establishing the
business and operating it successfully. In particular, Business entrepreneurship
means setting up business with a view to making profit knowing the inherited
risk of loss and successfully operating the business.

Story of Aminul
Mr. Aminul islam used to think about doing something different from his
boyhood. He attended his family business of clothing after completion of
degree from a local college. But he could not be satisfied with this business. He
used to visit the market by the highway near his house. One day he realized
that very often the vehicles stop here for simple repairing. Realizing the
necessity of repairing, Aminul formed capital from his own saving and some
borrowings and established a workshop. Since he did not have the expertise in
this job, he undertook three month training from the local Youth Development
Center. Initially the earning from the business was not mentionable. But,
because of hard working, efficient service and honesty, reputation of his
business spread around and income started to increase as well. Having
benefitted from this business, he is now planning to set up a petrol pump at the

adjacent area.

16 Business Entrepreneurship

Mr. Aminul has taken risk to fulfill his desire and worked hard with strong
determination. These effort is his business entrepreneurship.

The person who knowing the uncertainties of results, establishes business with
strong determination and courage and runs the business successfully, is a
Business entrepreneur or Industry Entrepreneur. Business entrepreneurship and
business entrepreneur; these two words are closely related to each other.
Business entrepreneur is he who attempts business entrepreneurship. Henry
Ford of American Ford Company, Konoke Matsusita founder of Japanese
electronic manufacturing company Matsusita were world famous entrepreneur.
In Bangladesh famous entrepreneurs are Mr. Jahurul Islam, Ranoda Prashad
Saha, Janab Ali, Samson H. Chowdhury. In fact, the owner of every industry is
an entrepreneur. Form the biographies of the entrepreneurs from home and
abroad, it can be seen that most of them started business in a smaller scale. With
the help of strong mind set, hard work, perseverance, and work effort gradually
they became owner of large industries.
Difference between entrepreneurship and business entrepreneurship:
Entrepreneurship can be for anything. But, business entrepreneurship is the
investment of money and labor to earn profit knowing the presence of risk. For
example, suppose you can make beautiful things from bamboo and cane. You
tried to make a new kind of cane chair, this is your entrepreneurship. If you
collect money and start a shop for making things of bamboo and cane and
successfully ran the business then it will be business entrepreneurship. The
primary objective of business entrepreneurship is profit making and other
entrepreneurship is for public welfare.
Activity 1: Find out which one of the following is entrepreneurship & which
oneis business entrepreneurship

L. Arranging a debating program

2. Establishing and operating a photocopy shop.

3. Establishing and operating business of toy manufacturing

5. Manufacturing leather goods and selling
6, Arranging and operating cricket match
7. Running business of Jewelry.

8. Planting trees around the house

9, Establishing and running the business of furniture made
of steel

10. Manufacturing food products
11. Maintaining operation to earn profit

2025
Business Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneur 7

Characteristics of Business Entrepreneurship

By analyzing the concept of business entrepreneurship the following
characteristics and attributes are identified:

|, This is the work effort to establish business. Business entrepreneurship helps
to successfully run all kinds of activities related to establishing a business.

2. Doing business knowing the existence of risk with a view to earning profit.
Business entrepreneurship helps to assess the amount of risk properly and
iake the moderate risk as well.

3, The result of business entrepreneurship is a business organization. The
meaning of this is that the concept of business entrepreneurship helps
to execute the thoughts into reality.

4, Another outcome of business entrepreneurship is goods or service,
5, Running the business successfully

6. Creating employment for self. An entrepreneur can generate his own source
of income through Business entrepreneurship,

7. Generate employment for others. Business entrepreneurship can
generate employment for others along with the entrepreneur himself.

8. Making of new asset resources. Business entrepreneurship helps to develop
human resources and the formation of capital.

9. In general, it helps to develop the overall economy of the country.
Business entrepreneurship can contribute to other areas also besides income
generation and solving unemployment problem of the country,

10.Taking social responsibility along with earning profit. Business
entrepreneurship encourages the entrepreneur to participate in various
development work of the society,

Qualities of a Business Entrepreneur

From the discussion of business entrepreneurship, some idea can be mferred
‘formed about the qualities of an entrepreneur. Some believe that the
entrepreneurs are entrepreneur by born. This means that form the birth they
inherit some qualities which help them to be famous and successful
entrepreneur, At present days entrepreneurs can be groomed up through
education, training and providing various opportunities. Main qualities of an
entrepreneur are-

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-3
18 Business Entrepreneurship

« Confidence * Creativity

e Independent mentality e Inventing capacity

e Effort e Ability to work hard

* Organizing capacity « Ability to take risk

e Courage e Ability to leadership

* Perseverance « Ability to collect capital

* Sensibility e Desire for success

® Attentivencds * Mentality of facing challenge

e Flexibility « Mentality of taking lessons from
failure

The entrepreneurs are capable to identify and utilize the prevailing economic
opportunities in the country. They show their sign of efficiency in availing the
facility from the government for industry development. They plan on the limited
resources to achieve their desired goal and take effective steps to execute those
plans. Successful entrepreneurs take well informed and planned decisions. They
assess the constraints against execution of their plan and try to remove them
beforehand. Capability of coping up with the change of environment and having
influence on other people is also termed as special quality of an entrepreneur.
They assess the risk. related to Business, carefully and take steps either to avoid
or reduce that risk. Taking caleulative risk is another characteristic of a
successful entrepreneur. Making adjustment with the changed environment and
desired goal is also a major characteristic of entrepreneurs.

Business risk is the uncertainties of earning profit from business. A successful,
entrepreneur assesses the reasons of possible risk and their extent and takes
preparation to face them beforehand. A successful entrepreneur has the quality
of leadership. A successful entrepreneur accumulates capital, arranges financing
for the organization and ensures their proper utilization in the business. He
shows the efficiency in coordinating the general resources with the human
resources of the company. He owns in deep knowledge of management. They
have the up to date knowledge about coordinating with the technologies of ages.
They innovate different production process and successfully implement them.
They open new horizon for industrial revolution.

An entrepreneur enjoys dealing with challenging works. They provide untiring
effort and sacrifice self comfort and luxury for achieving their business goal.
They are so confident about their own decision that they continuously work to
achieve their desired goal and keeps working until achieving the result. If they
fail, they start again after analyzing the reason of their failure, Strong desire for
achieving goal isa mentionable feature of their character. Real entrepreneur

20235
2025

Business Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneur 19

acknowledge their fault and take lessons from them. Learning from own
experiences and experience of others, and application of those learning in work
place is another special quality of their character. Successful entrepreneurs get
satisfaction and pleasure from their success.

Importance of Business Entrepreneurship in Socio-Economic
Development

Bangladesh is a developing country. According to Bangladesh Economic
Review-2010, 50% of our national income comes from service, 20% comes
from agriculture and 30% comes from industry. Industrial sector plays a vital
role in the development of any country. The development of all the sectors
including industrial sector is possible through development of business
entrepreneurship. Business entrepreneurship can contribute to our socio
economic development in the following way:

« Proper utilization of resources

Business entrepreneurship ensures the uses of natural resources and
human resources of our country. Besides, increase of investment
and proper utilization of resources are possible through establishing

new industry.

® Increase of national Income and Production

The national income increases through business entrepreneurship. As a
result attaining government’s target for national income becomes possible.

« New employment generation

Entrepreneurs establish industry, operate and expand it along with
government, As aresult new employment generation becomes possible
which plays a vital role to remove unemployment problem.

* Development of Efficient Human Resources
Bangladesh is a populous country. This large population can become
our asset. Because, a successful entrepreneur turns the inefficient
people to efficient through engaging them in productive works.

* Reduces Dependence on others
We can reduce dependence on others through business entrepreneurship.
We can become economically self sufficient with proper utilization
of business entrepreneurship.
20

Business Entrepreneurship

Favorable Environment for Developing Business Entrepreneurship

If we look at the developed countries, then we will see that the main reason for
their advancement is the positive environment for establishing busmess,
operation and expansion. In our country we do not have deficiency in brilliance,
mentality and efficiency. Our advancement is hindered only for the lack of
positive environment. The following positive environment aspects are necessary
for development of business entrepreneurship:

Developed Infrastructural Element

There are some necessary elements for operating business such as
electricity, gas, communication etc. These elements are necessary for
existence of positive environment for business entrepreneurship.

Government Assistance

With the help of Government, business entrepreneurship. of the country
can grow more rapidly and be enriched. Various government decisions
like tax rebate, supplying capital with little or without interest. etc. can
make a positive environment for business entrepreneurship.

Socio-Economic Stability

Economic, Social and Political stability has a positive impact over
creating positive business environment. But Economic, Social and

Political instability create a negative impact on business entrepreneurship.

Supportive Law and Order Situation

Establishment and operation of business is easier, if the law and order
situation of the country is positive. On the other hand negative law and
order situation is a threat to business entrepreneurship and business
operation.

Arrangement of Sufficient Capital

To successfully implement any kind of business entrepreneurship,
sufficient capital is necessary. Due to the deficiency of capital,
establishment and operation of business is not possible in most cases, In
this regard, banking system of the country needs to be developed so that
supply of capital to the new entrepreneurs 1s ensured.

Opportunity of Training

Some times correct steps can not be taken though opportunity prevails
only because of lack of training. Through training positive
environment for business can be created.

£023
2025

Business Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneur at

Activity 2: Identify the positive and negative elements for establishing
and operating business in your area:

Environment Positive/Negative | Reason

Infrastructural Facility
Government Assistance

Socio Economic Stability

Law and Order Situation

Supply of Sufficient Capital
Opportunity of Training
Others

Relationship between Entrepreneurship & Risk

Ms. Ishta Akter, the owner of, Ishia Fashion House at Rapa Plaza in Dhaka is a
successful entrepreneur. She helps her family and buys all the necessities with
the income from this business. Mainly, she started this business as a hobby, but
now she ears mentionable amount from the business. But, she realized that
more profit can be earned from the business of mobile phone considering its
demand. Her family members warned her that this business will be risky since
she has no knowledge of the business. But, without paying any heed to these
concerns of her family members, she took a bank loan. Besides, she took some
money from her running business and decided on importing mobile phones from
abroad.

Picture: Buying and selling in a shop
22 Business Entrepreneurship

On the other hand her competitors imported mobiles at lower price. As a result
she incurred huge loss. The main reason for such a failure was that she started
the business without considering the risk associated with it.

There is always a relation that exists between business entrepreneurship and
risk. In some business, there is less risk and in some cases risk is high. Business
associated with high risks has higher possibility of profit as well. And the
business having a lower risk has low return. For example, we can say that
groceries have less risk, thus profit is also limited. On the other hand like the
above mentioned case study if there is probability of high profit, there is also
higher risk associated.

There are various types risk in business. The demand of a product or service can
decline at any time. Profit can be reduced for that reason. This possibility is
business risk. On the other hand it may happen that the businessman expected a
certain profit from the business, but in reality he earned less profit. This is called
monetary risk,

Establishing a business and running it properly is a risky job. Besides, with the
help of business entrepreneurship earning more is also possible through
investing in profitable ventures. But one has to keep in mind that a successful
entrepreneur always assesses the associated risk beforehand and tries to reduce
that and always takes tolerable risk. Excessive msk and over confidence may
tum any plan into a disappointment.

Obstacles to Entrepreneurship Development in Bangladesh

Prevailing environment in Bangladesh for development of business
entrepreneurship is not positive in all sectors. Because of some obstacles,
business entrepreneurship development cannot reach to the optimum level in our
country. The obstacles for business entrepreneurship development in
Bangladesh are discussed below:

* Lack of Proper Planning: For entrepreneurship development disciplined
planning that can be achieved gradually is needed. Though it is a matter of
regret that in our country there is huge lack of such good planning.

* More Interest towards Job: People of our country are dependent on
agriculture from ancient time. As a result we have less interest in industry
and business. Traditional education system in our country make people
more interested towards employment. For entrepreneurship development it
is one of main obstacles.

2025
2025

Business Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneur a3

Lack of Technical and Vocational Education: General education
system in our country Is based on memorization and theory. For a long
time this system has been continuing. Though there is separate
technical and vocational education system, meritorious students are not
interested in this. On the other hand, in general education there is no
inclusion of technical and vocational education and the student fails to
get a good idea about this. As result, habit does not grow for business
entrepreneurship.

Lack of Campaign: To implement any step, campaign plays a
significant role. Lack of campaign for various private and public steps
regarding business entrepreneurship development, lots of meritorious
students from towns and villages, unemployed people remain ignorant
about it. As a result, business entrepreneurship development activities
remain unsuccessful.

Lack of Financing Arrangement: There are many people who are
interested in entrepreneurship but due to lack of sufficient capital and
money they cannot step forward. Lack of sufficient fund arrangement
is another important obstacle for entrepreneurship development.
Lack of Training: Being an entrepreneur though is a by born quality,
it is possible to make entrepreneur through proper training as well, But,
in our country there is lack of training institutions for entrepreneurship
development.

Political Instability: Political instability is a major obstacle for the
economic development and growth of any country. Because of political
instability, law and order situation in the country deteriorates and
business activities get obstructed. As a result, potential entrepreneurs
muslay their interest for doing something new.

Ways to Overcome the Obstacles of Entrepreneurship Development
in Bangladesh

In Bangladesh obstacles prevailing against development of business
entrepreneurship can be removed by adopting the following steps:

2

Effective and Realistic plans to be taken on
Huge training activities to be implemented

Massive campaign to be arranged all over the country
Business Entrepreneurship

® Technical and Vocational education system to be expanded,
e Entrepreneurs are to be provided with investment advice.
« Supply of required capital to be arranged.

« Business Entrepreneurship subject is to be included in the secondary
and higher secondary level on a large seale.

e Political stability needs to be ensured

If the above noted issues are ensured with certainty, in that case, hopefully the
door of entrepreneurship development will open to a significant level.

EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question

1, Which one of the following is not a quality of a business entrepreneur?
a. Confidence b. Innovativeness
c. Capability of arranging capital d. Mentality of avoiding Risk

2, The young generation can be made interested for business entrepreneurship-
i. Through expanding technical and Vocational education
il. Huge campaign in the mass media

ili. Introducing this as a mandatory course

Which one of the following is correct-?
a. i & ii b, i & iil
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii

Give answer to the question No. 3 & 4 after reading the following
paragraph:

Mr. Enayet took training on fish cultivation from the local Youth Training
Center. He decided to start fish cultivation with his brother, in their family
owned pond. But, some of their frends wanted to make them disinterested by
telling them about the risk associated with it. They didn't pay amy heed to it and
they moved on with their plan.

3, What can you call Enayet’s Fish Cultivation steps?
a, Entrepreneurship b. Business Entrepreneurship ‘a
¢c, Business d. Hobby Ss
Business Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneur 25

4, What quality of an entrepreneur is shown by Enayet in not listening to
his friends about the risk?

a. Patience b. Courage

c. Generosity d. Mentality to take challenges

Creative question

1. Mr. Mehdad and Mr. Nuhash, two friends returned home after staying abroad
for ten years. They are not willing to go back. Mehdad's area is famous for
making pressed and puffed rice. For this reason, Mehdad united the efficient
workers of his village and decided to make pressed and pulfed rice on a large
scale. For this, the workers also become solvent along with Mehdad. on the
other hand, Nuhash established a Library and Museum in his house to keep the
tradition of his village. The villagers are very happy with their activities.

a. Matsusita Company is from which country?

b. What do you understand by Business Entrepreneurship? Explain.

c. Establishing library and Museum in Nuhash’s village is what type of
concept? Explain.

d. “Mehdad’s initiative can be pursued by others” — Evaluate this statement,

2. Kajol likes drawing from the very boyhood. He used to draw and write on
banner for various occasions in school. The teachers and his friends praise him
for his flawless and attractive works. After the exam, Kajol makes some poster
and banner for an NGO. He gets some money for this in return. At this his
interest grows more. But, Kajol could not take his activities to a larger scale
because of some problems. Kajol dreams that one day the fame of his “Kajol
Art” would spread beyond his locality.

a. How do you explain Entrepreneurship?

b. What is the difference between Entrepreneurship and Business
Entrepreneurship?

c. What quality of entrepreneur do you indentify in the character Kajol? Explain.

d. A large number of Entrepreneurs can be developed in the country
through motivating entrepreneurs like Kajol. Evaluate this in your own words.

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-4
