Chapter Thirteen
Environment of life

The environment of an organism is all the living and non-living components
around it, Light, air, rain, storm, soil, water are important in the life of
organisms. The living world around it also plays significant roles in the life of
ihe organism, The steps that the organisms take in different stages of life, also
have effects on the lives of the other organisms living in the same environment.
In the living world the food chain and food web are very important issues
without which the existence of life cannot be imagined.

2023
2025

explain ecosystem:

explain the interrelationship between the elements of an ecosystem;

explain food chain and food web;

draw the comparisons between the energy flow and the nutrient elements of an
ecosystem;

compare the relationship between energy performances in between trophic
levels;

explain the concept of an enerey pyramid;

explain the concept of an ecological pyramid in limiting the food chains;
explain biodiversity and types of biodiversity;

evaluate the role of biodiversity in sustaining the stability of an ecosystem;
explain the interactions and interdependence in between different organisms in
maintaining balance in environment;

explain the methods used for the conservation of the environment;

analyse the importance of the conservation of the environment in maintaining
the balance in it;

determine the reciprocal interrelationship between the producers, consumers
and transformers in a given locality;

identify the causes of pollution of all the elements of a specific environment;
draw a flowchart showing the flow ef energy, food chain and food web in an
ecosystem;

perceive the contribution of the components of an ecosystem to the maintenance
of balance of the environment and will be cautious for its preservation.
13.1 Ecosystem

Our environment consists of all the organisms, and non-living substances in the
world. Organisms actively collect components from the non-living world and
carry on their life, and alter death become waste substances and mix with the
environment again, sending back all the elements to the environment. Green
plants collect carbon dioxide from the air and water from the soil through
photosynthesis. and produce carbohydrates, releasing oxygen into the air. For
the whole living world (plants and animals) the oxygen, required for respiration,
comes from the oxygen produced through photosynthesis. Both green and
non-green plants absorb mineral salts from the soil as food. Herbivorous animals
survive by eating different parts of plants in different ways. Carnivorous animals
consume herbivorous animals and other small carnivorous creatures. Waste
materials from all animals become mixed with the environment again. After
death, all plant and animal bodies go back to the environment and are
disintegrated. Bacteria and microorganisms do this disintegration process. This
way, the balance in the natural environment is maintained.

In natural environment the exchange of energy and materials, between plants
and animals and the living and non-living substances, is called interaction.
Interrelations are developed through these interactions. An ecosystem is any unit
of landscape where there are non-living substances, food producing green
plants, animals dependent on plants and microorganisms for the disintegration of
the dead bodies of organisms, and a proper interrelation between these elements.
For the different elements for nutrition and other physiological activities, soil,
air and water are required.

13.1.1 Components of an ecosystem

The living community, inanimate components of the environment and the
physical conditions collectively develop an ecosystem. Each of these main
components is composed of some other small components. The living
components are greatly diverse.

f025
(a) Non-living matter: Non-living matter harbors the habitats of living
organisms, provide them with oxygen for respiration and can supply some
nutrient components as well. The components of all inanimate materials can be
divided into two groups, such as, inorganic matter and organic matter.

i) Inorganic matter: Water. air and mineral substances in the soil, which have
not evolved from any living body, but existed before the emergence of
organisms are the inorganic components of an ecosystem, such as calcium,
potassium, iron, nitrogen, oxygen and carbon dioxide etc.

ii) Organic matter: The waste materials of plants and animals or the dead
bodies of organisms or substances derived from them are called the organic
matter of an ecosystem. They are generally termed as humus. Some of the
components of humus are urea, cells, tissue and organs of plants and animals.
This organic matter is nutritious for plants. This is why compost should be
applied for the cultivation of plants. Most animals also like soil composed of rich
humus.

(b) Physical components: The amount of sunlight, temperature, presence of
water vapour in the air, air pressure and wind, depth and height from the surface
of the earth (under the ground or under the water) all influence the ecosystem.

These clement collectively create the wheather and climate of any region, These
are all the physiological components of an ecosystem.

(c) Living components: The living world is the active component of ecosystem.
They cause changes in the environment through their activities. The living
components of the environment are of three types: 1. Producers 2. Consumers
3. Transformers.

i) Producers; Green plants, in the presence of sunlight, obtaining carbon
dioxide from the air and absorbing water from the soil, produce their food
carbohydrates. At this time, oxygen is produced as a by-product. This is why
photosynthesis is the production process of an ecosystem. The producers are the
preen plants. These green plants are also called autotrophs because they can
produce their food themselves, they do not depend on others for their food.

Forma-36, Biology Class-9-10
ii) Consumers: No animal can produce food from non-living substances in the
environment. They directly or indirectly depend on planis for their food. This is
why they are called heterotrophic animals. The animals which directly consume
plants as food, are called herbivorous. They are the consumers of the first line.
Grasshoppers, chickens, cow, goats and deer are examples of herbivorous

animals.

[Eanes stamcten
LL

| Loe] Lee.

|
_ —— —!—
| Producer consumer| [Decomposes|

(Herbiver (consumers of Ist. level)

Camivar (consumers of 2nd. level)

Figure: 13.01 Components of an ceosystem (in a chart)

The animals, which depend on herbivorous animals for their food. are callec
secondary consumers or consumers of the second line. They are carnivorous
animals. Toad, fox, tiger are examples of carnivorous animals.

The animals, which eat secondary consumers, are also carnivorous. They may be
called tertiary consumers or top consumers, such as peacock, snake, tiger etc.
There are also animals who like to eat dead bodies of other organisms than the
living body, for instance, vulture, crow, fox, hyena etc. They are called
scavengers because they keep the environment clean by eating the dead bodies
of different organisms. Sometimes in the ecosystem, some animals play a double
role as a consumer in two different levels of the food chain, such as man. Man is
at a time herbivorous and omnivorous.

iii) Decomposers: Some microorganisms, like bacteria and fungus, get their
food from the waste of plants and animals and their dead bodies, and as a
consequence, they are mixed with the soil and water by being decomposed.
These mixed components can be again consumed as food components. This is
why these microorganisms are called decomposers or transformers.

2025
£23

13.2 Ecosystem of a pond

To take a closer look at an ecosystem, a pond can be thought of. The deeper
relationships, between the organisms living in the ponds and the non-living
substances there, can be conceived. The non-living components are the different
types of organic and inorganic components water, sunlight, carbon dioxide,
oxygen, calcium. phosphorus etc. The living components are the producers,
consumers of the first level, the consumers of secondary and tertiary levels and
the different types of decomposers.

Inorganic component
{inotganie and organic compound

Figure: 13.02 A pond ecosystem

(a) Producers: The producers are the photosynthetic algae and plants of shallow
water. The free-floating microscopic organisms are called plankton.
Phytoplankton, green algae and other aquatic plants, which produce food
through photosynthesis are called primary producers.
(b) Consumer of primary level: Different types of floating insects, larva of
mosquito, very small animals, zooplankton , Rui and catla fish etc. are the
consumers of the first level. Free-floating small animals are called zooplankton.
These consumers cannot produce their food themselves. So, they live by directly
consuming the primary producers.

(c) Consumers of secondary level: Small fishes, some aquatic insects, toad etc.
are the consumers of the second level. They cannot produce their food
themselves and cannot directly consume the primary producers. They eat the
consumers of the first level as their food.

(d) Consumers of tertiary level: The consumer which eats secondary
consumers such as small fishes, prawns etc. is called the tertiary consumer.
Shoul, bhetki, boal like big fishes and stork are consumers of the tertiary level.

(e) Decomposers: Many fungi and bacteria live in the pond as saprophytes, and
they are decomposers. They live floating in the water or at the bottom in the
muddy habitat. They attack living and non-living organisms and help them to be
degraded, and as a result organic and inorganic chemical components required
by the producers are produced again for them. The producers in the pond can
again consume the substances created by the decomposers.

13.3 Food Chain

Among the living components of any ecosystem, first the green plants start their
activities. If they do not produce food, herbivorous animals and other
carnivorous animals may die in want of food. When the food energy is flown
from the primary producers through different trophic levels, then this flow is
called the food chain.

For instance, the green grass on a field is the primary producer and
grasshoppers live on of the grass. The toad eats the grasshoppers and the snake
eats the whole toad as its food. If the snake is small and there is a large gui snake
around it, a reptile of lizard family, it will definitely eat the snake. In this case, a
food chain may be formed as shown in the flowchart.

2025
2025

Grass ———» grasshopper t+ toad ——+ snake ——» tui snake

Producer consumer of consumer of consumer of consumer of top

primary level secondary level tertiary level level

In different ecosystems food chains may be dilferent, such as predator food
chain, parasitic food chain and saprophytic food chain.

(a) Predator Food Chain: The food cham, where organisms of the primary
level are of the smallest size and consecutively consumers of the higher levels
prey the organisms of the lower levels and eat them, is called a predator food
chain. The food chain mentioned above is an example of a predator food chain.

(b) Parasitic Food Chain: Parasitic plants and animals in most of the cases
derive their food from a host much larger in size than they are. In some cases
other smaller parasites are dependent on all the parasites for their food. In this
type of food chain, the primary producers may not be always at the beginning
level. The chain remains incomplete.

Man ——» mosquilo ———» Dengu Virus

Remarkably, the blood sucked by a female Aedes mosquito does not provide any
nutrients to the mosquito but helps to develop its egg side the body.

(c) Saprophytic food chain: If a food chain is stretched from the dead
organisms to the different trophic levels, then it is called a saprophytic food
chain.

Dead body ———» fungi ———* earthworm

Needless to say, this kind of food chain is incomplete and the food chain
describes only part of the total interaction or interrelations of an ecosystem.
Parasitic and saprophytic food chains are always incomplete since there is no
producer in them. Both types of food chains, to maintain their activities, depend
on one or more levels of the predatory food chain. The food chains of an
ecosystem are all based on the activities of the photosynthesis of the producers
green plants.
13.4 Food web

In most cases, the same consumer can be placed im different trophic levels. This
way some food chains collectively may form a net or web like structure. This is
called a food web. This is a phenomenon for both the terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystem. This concept can be made clearer by thinking of a pond ecosystem.

a ; Zooplankton
= Big fish

Sniall fish

Figure: 13.03 Food web

In the diagram above, il is found that primary producers (algae) directly provide
zooplanktons and small fishes with their food. Both the small and big fishes eat
zooplanktons as their food. This big lish also eats the small fishes. A hawk eats
small fishes and some other small members of the big fish belonging to the same
species. Here five organisms have developed food chains in different ways. This
way, more complex food webs can be developed in different ecosystems than the
food web developed here.

Five food chains are found in the food web mentioned above.

1. algae ———® small fish ———» hawk

2.algae ——” zooplankton ——» big fish» hawk

3, algae ———® small fish ——» big fish ———+hawk

4. algae ——* zooplankton t——+» small fish M—+big fish +» hawk
5. algae ——» zooplankton ———+» small fish ———» hawk

2025
2025

A food web in a forest ecosystem may be the following:

oe a

Monitur

Tiger
Figure: 13.04 A food web of forest

Individual Activity

Activity : Write down the food chains in the food web mentioned in the
figure 13.04.

Nutrition flow in ecosystem

Plants produce food through the photosynthesis process after obtaining
necessary inorganic substances. A plant uses a part frem the food it produces
itself, and the remaining food is stored in the plant body. Herbivorous animals
eat these plants and carnivorous animals eat the herbivorous. Atter the death of
these plants and animals, decomposers transform them into inorganic substances
by using them as their food and the decomposers return the substance to the
states from where they are taken. Green plants obtain these substances and again
use them in producing food, The cyclic movement of nutrition materials is called
the nutrition flow, The flow of nutrition materials through food chains is a
unique character of ecosystems.
Energy spent ¢
In respiration

TN

Camivor

’

Producer - Herbivar

Figure: 13.05 Brief chart of the flow of nutrition and energy

Energy flow in the ecosystem

The sun is the main source of energy in any ecosystem, From the amount of light
and heat energy that reaches the planet earth, the green plants store only 2% of
the received energy through photosynthesis. Heat and chemical energy produced
by photosynthesis. are primarily stored as carbohydrate for the requirements of
the next stages of ecosystem. This energy, stored in plants, reaches different
trophic levels through different kinds of food chains. The energy again comes
back to the environment through the terminal acts of the decomposers.

The herbivorous animals, consumers of first level, maintain life by cating
leaves, stems, flowers, fruits, seeds or roots of green plants. This way the
chemical energy produced in green plants reaches herbivorous animals. The
carmyorous animals, who live by eating the consumers of first level
(herbivorous animals) are the consumers of the second level. The chemical
energy, from the consumers of the first level, is transferred this way to the
bodies of consumers of the second level. The chemical energy from the
consumers of second level reaches the consumers of third level in the form of
food. If any other superior consumers eat the consumers of the third level as
their food, the energy reaches the consumers of the top level.

After death. procurement of energy is stopped in all the organisms. Then the
chemical energy stored in the dead bodies comes back to the environment in the
form of inanimate substances and energy after being broken down by the
activities of decomposers. The energy stored in different imanimate substances

f025
of the environment becomes suitable for the plants to use again. And this way the
flow of natural energy in ecosystem is continued,

Some energy gets wasted in every level of all types of food chain, The
herbiverous consumer does not store the exact amount of energy, which it
procures from the producers of green plants. The amount of nutrition that a
consumer of the second level obtains from the herbivorous consumers does not
even reach its own body, as some of the energy is released into the inanimate
environment. This way, at the time of transferring food from one organism to
another, much energy goes out of the system in accordance with the principles of
the ecosystem. This is why, if in an ecosystem the number of trophic level is low,
energy waste decreases accordingly.

Relation of energy between trophic levels: Every step of a food chai is called
a trophic level. Each of all the levels, (primary producers, primary consumers of
the first level, consumers of the second level and the consumers of the top most
level) is a trophic level. The producers represent the first or the lowest level in an
ecosystem. The herbivorous consumers, consumers of first level are the
representatives of second trophic level. This way carnivorous animals of both the
higher and lower levels represent third and top most trophic levels respectively.
Some of the energy collected from the sun in the producers or in the lowest
trophic level of any food chain goes out in every consecutive step as heat energy.
As a result, it is found that the energy the producers collect from the sun is
reduced when reaching the second trophic level, The amount of energy is reduced
again when reaching the top most trophic level. Generally in any ecosystem 10%
of the stored energy is transferred from one trophic level to another and the
remaining 90% energy is released as heat in the atmosphere or remains unused.

Concept of energy pyramid: The narrow apex of the three-dimensional
structure based on its triangular base is called a pyramid. The structure of
trophic levels in an ecosystem is shown with the structure of a pyramid. The
chart, describing the arrangement of energy storage and transfer of every
nutrition level, connected to food chain, is called the energy pyramid. The
amount of energy is much higher in the level of producers than in the next
trophic levels. The organisms of higher trophic levels than those of lower

Forma-37, Biology Class-9-10
trophic level lose more energy for respiration and other activities. This is why
the producers and the top most consumers are placed on the base and al the top of
the pyramid respectively.

Effects of energy pyramid to keep food chain in limit.

The flow of energy is always unidirectional. This energy flow can never be
turned around. About 90% energy is reduced in every stage. The ever-increasing
loss of energy limits the size of a food chain to 4 or 5 stages. The longer a food
chain is, the more energy is reduced in the higher trophic levels and at one stage
there would be no energy left.

1

Ist traphic level

Phytoplankton

Figure: 13.06 Energy pyramid
13.5 Biodiversity

The environment is composed of animate and inanimate substances. It is the
assemblage of many types of organisms and innumerable kinds of inanimate
substances. How many types of organisms are there in the world? It is difficult
to give the exact figure of it but on account of species (who are similar to each
other in physical and reproductive characters and originate from the same
ancestor) it is easier to present. Until now, it has been possible to know the
description and nomenclature of 13 lacs of animals and 4 lacs of plants. Every

025

Lae |
£23

species is characterized with its own unique features and is different and

identifiable from all other species. For instance, jackfruit is a species, and it is
possible to separate it from other species by its special characteristics. It has
become possible to group the living world into millions of species because of the
existing diversity in organisms. The human being is a species. At present about
seven hundred crores of human beings live on the earth. They are all not exactly
the same and are different from each other in some characteristics. So, diversity
is there even among the members of the same species. Briefly, it can be said that
biodiversity is the abundance and variability among organisms existing on the
earth.

13.5.1 Types of biodiversity
Biodiversity can be divided into three categories: (1) species diversity,
(2) genetic diversity and (3) ecosystem diversity.

Species diversity: Species diversity generally means the total number of
organisms existing on the earth. A species is different from other species by its
distinctive characteristics. such as, a deer is distinct from a tiger in size, habits,
ferocity, number, mode of reproduction etc. The difference in different issues of
a species from other species is species diversity.

Genetic diversity: Differences in many issues are found in the members of the
same species. Though they belong to the same species, their structure, size, and
ability to resist diseases and to endure environmental adversities are different.
These differences emerge because of the small diversity in the composition of
their genes. Hereditary characters of organisms are transmitted through
generations by genes. There is a gene for every characteristic. Changes in
characteristic in organisms occur because of the changes in the structure and
arrangement of genes, and new species may evolve. Through this process, the
diversity introduced within organisms of the same species is called genetic
diversity.

Ecosystem diversity: If ary changes occur with the physical, chemical and
organic components of a ecosystem, the balance of the ecosystem is
hampered. These changes are, of course, slow and steady. To adapt with these
changes, changes also occur in the organisms living there. As a result the

biodiversity developed there is called the ecosystem diversity, In a small pond
ecosystem, the habitats, for the plants and animals are different than those in a river
ecosystem. In the ecosystem of a forest, grassland, lake, river, water reservoir, hill,
sea, or desert the living communities are developed with their own distinct
characteristics.

Effect of biodiversity on the maintenance of stability in an ecosystem

‘The components of the environment are deeply interrelated with each other. To
maintain balance in the environment, this complex relationship has developed.
With the activities of a large number of organisms, the balance is maintained in the
environment, The extinction of a species in an environment can cause a large
catastrophe. So, for the stability of the environment, biodiversity is especially
important.

Some organisms and animals were once considered unnecessary and undesired.
With the passage of time, it has been found that these organisms are continuously
playing a necessary role for the conservation of the environment. Once there were
innumerable oysters in the coast of Chesapeake in the United States of America.
They could purify the water of the whole locality in only three days. But now
99% of those oysters have been extinct. As a result, the remaining oysters cannot
purify the water of that total locality even by a year. This is why, the water of that
coast is gradually becoming muddy, and the level of dissolved oxygen in the
water locality is being reduced. A mature toad in a day can eat the amount of

worms and insects equal to its body ween. These worms and insects cause
harm to our cultivated harvest. :

Because of pesticides, toads are
being killed, Worms and insects are
the main food of birds. Among
them, the number of the pests,
which cause harm to humans and |
cultivated harvest, is high. Besides
that, birds play a significant role in

pollination. We know that |
owl, eagle, vulture. and raptor are

Fioure 13. 97; Vullure, kise snd crow
regularly cleans the garbage of nature

2025

predatory birds. By eating rats, they keep the number of rats under control. If a
pair of rats, living at a house of a human without any trouble could reproduce
treely, the number of rats would be §80 at the end of a year. But an owl can eat
three rats in a day. If vultures, raptors and crows would not clear the dead and
decaying organic matters, the world would be covered with them. This is why no
organism can be considered unnecessary. If any organism is extinct from the
environment, the stability of an ecosystem is destroyed. So, for the sustainability

of ecosystem the role of biodiversity is unquestionable.

13.5.2 Interaction and interdependence among different organisms and the
balance of environment

Green plants are generally called self-dependent because they are autotrophic.
But considered from environmental point of view, no organism is self-dependent,
not even the green plants. Plants, birds and animals, worms and insects and other
organisms influence each other.

A flowering plant depends on worms and insects for its cross-pollination and on
others birds and animals for the dispersal of seeds. For photosynthesis, green
plants use carbon dioxide that is released by animals during respiration.
Conversely, animals use oxygen released by plants in the daytime. Bacteria,
fungi and different microorganisms in different ways affect plants, animals and
worms and insects. It can briefly be said that routual assembly and dependence
are the key to the regulation of the activities of life. In the livmg world existing
organic relationships between plants and animals can be designated with the
term symbiosis. In symbiosis, the related organisms are called symbionts. The
action-reaction, that occurs im between symbiotic organisms, is called
interaction. It has also been clear from the discussion made above that the
organism participating in interactions, are interdependent and none is
self-sustaining. Environmental scientist Odum says that this interdependent
relationship can occur in two ways:

(a) positive interaction and

(b) negative interaction.
(a) Positive interaction: The interrelationship, in which two organisms help
each other, is called positive interaction. Of these symbiotic organisms, one or
both may be benefited. This beneficial interaction can be grouped further into
two categories named mutualism and commensalisms.

(i) Mutualism: The relationship is mutualism when in the association both the
organisms are benefited. For exaraple, a bee, or fly, etc. flies around from flower
to flower to attain the nectar and as a result, the pollination is accomplished.
Many birds and bats live on eating fruits, and they release seeds with their stools.

Root

(A) Nodules in leguminous plant (B) Longitudinal section of root and nodule

Figure: 13.08 Mutualism

In this way seeds are transferred and the distribution of plants ts done. This seed
helps to develop a new plant. The association of an algae and a fungus forms
lichen. The fungus collects water vapour from the air and mineral salts to use for
both of them. On the other side, the algae produces carbohydrates for itself and
for the fungus. The rhizobium bacteria residing at the roots of leguminous plants
form nodules, fix atmospheric nitrogen in them. They supply this fixed nitrogen
to the host leguminous plant, and in return collect their carbohydrates from it.

(ii) Commensalisms: In this association only one organism gets benefited.
Though the other associate is not benelited, it does not lose amything. For
example, a creeper plant with its root is anchored in the soil and creeps up round a

wy
big tree. This way it collects a sufficient amount of light by spreading onother 3
2025

Environment of Life 295

plant. Woody creeper does not depend on the plant that is providing shelter for it
for food, and does not do any harm to it. Epiphytic plants collect food from the
air but do not do any harm to the plant providiny shelter. Some algae dwell in
bodies of other plants, but do not do any harm to them.

(a) Epiplivtic Plant (b) Creeper plant
Figure: 13.09 Commensalism

(b) Negative interaction: In this case the relationship ts detrimental to one or to
the both. Negative interaction can be grouped into three categories, such as-

(i) Exploitation: In this case one organism enjoys its rights by exploiting
directly or indirectly another organism from its rights, for example, dodder. A
dodder with the help of the absorbing structure hosteria collects food from the
plant. which has provided it with shelter. A cuckoo is never able to build a nest.

It lays its egg in the nest of a crow, and the crow hatches tts egg for it.
, :

through longitudinal section

Figure : 13.10 Exploitation
(ii) Competition: There may be tough competition between organisms for light,
air, water and food. In this competition, the stronger organism survives and the
weaker one is abandoned. This is a good example of inter and intra-species
struggle of Darwinism.

(iii) Antibiosis: If the growth and Normal growth of a colony
development of any organism is partly or
wholly interrupted by the biochemical Inhibited cotany

substance produced by another organism,
then this process is called antibiosis. This
type of relationship is mainly found in
micro-organisms. The reason behind the
discovery of penicillium by Alexender
Flemming was keeping antibiosis along with
penicilium.

Inhabited zone

Figure: 13.10) Antibiasis

It becomes clear from the discussion made above those actions and reactions are
continuously occurring in between the organisms existing in an environment,
and every component is interrelated to each other, By this relationship, some are
becoming benefited and some are harmed. This way, they are maintaining the
balance of the environment.

13.6 Significance and method of conserving environment

It is essential to conserve the environment to maintain habitable conditions for
the organisms living on our planet, the Earth. There are innumerable organisms
on the earth, and for their survival, there are different substances, such as, soil,
water and air etc. All these natural components are being damaged to meet the
different types of human demands, such as, food, clothes, dwelling place, and
health care for the excessive population of the present world. In this catastrophic
situation, if people do not become more conscious disaster will occur. In our
environment from the smallest plants, worms and insects to the large animals
and plants, none is valueless. In the realm of nature all the organisms and the
inanimate substances are each other tied closer. The biodiversity is formed with

f025
millions of species of plants, worms and insects, birds, animals and humans etc.
and the existence and well being of human race are based on it. Forests, hills,
water reservoirs, sea are the very essential harbours of biodiversity. So,
biodiversity will be sustained if the environment is well conserved. It is to be
remembered that biodiversity can sustain without human but human cannot be
sustained without diversity.

If the environment especially the forests are degraded, the rate of rainfall is
reduced, and the cultivation of crops is hampered. The temperature is raised for
the increasing amount of greenhouse gases (CO,, CO,, N,O etc.) and it is called
enhanced greenhouse effect. For the enhanced greenhouse eflect sea level will
rise and consequently, vast coastal areas will be inundated, weather will be
changed, forest will be damaged, crops will be destroyed by different pests and
the severity of storm and tornado will rise. If the environment is well conserved,
it will be possible to be safe from enhanced greenhouse effect. This is why from
now on all the best measures should be taken to conserve the environment.

Nowadays man has raised his voice for the conservation of environment because
of his own existence. The whole world has to come forward for the maintenance of
a healthy environment. It is also essential to organise people for the protection of
environment. Plantation should not be limited only in a weekly or monthly
programme. For cutting a tree, two trees should immediately be planted. Tree
should not be planted in unplanned way. It should be planted with accordance to
the suitability of surrounding ecosystem. Before setting any industry and mills in
any locality, their adverse effects on the environment should be first taken into
consideration and safe disposal of industrial waste should also be ensured.
Urbanisation should be well planned. Massive plantation should be carried out side
by side with the rapid urbanisation, Instead of wood, solar energy should be used
as fuel. Excessive use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides damage the normal
quality of soil and degrades beneficial microorganisms, terrestrial worms and
insects, aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. So, the use of bio-fertilizers should be
increased. Use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides should be minimized.

Forma-38, Biology Class-9-10
Excessive population in different ways causes serious. desolation on the
environment. Population should be controlled and communities of well-educated
people should be developed. Public awareness should be raised about negative
impacts of environment and to control the environmental pollution. Mass media
should play a prime role in this regard. The emission of greenhouse gases, carbon
dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide should immediately be reduced. To control the
soil erosion in coastal areas, massive plantation must be accomplished. This way
soil erosion will be controlled and the tornado and cyclone will be resisted as
well. Normal flow of water should be conserved by dredging river and water
bodies. This way salinity and water logging will be removed and the aquatic
ecosystems will remain in a normal state.

It is essential to conserve the biodiversity for the sustenance of healthy
environment and with this view all the plant and animal species, which are on the
verge of extinction from nature, should be conserved by special processes.
Measures should be taken to control the pollution of air, water, soil and sound.
International and national principles and guidelines should strictly be followed.

@) Individual Activity

( Activity: Find out what are the causes of polluting the environmental )

components in your locality and prepare a report on it.

~~

(Exercise

@) Short answer questions

1. What is symbiosis? Explain it.

2. What do you understand by plankton?
3. What is a parasitic food chain?

4, What is antibiosis?

5. What is nvutualism?

2025
£23

© magn one

1. The balance of environment is restored through the interaction and
interdependence of different organisms. Explain.

1. Which one is a saprophytic food chain?

a. grass

c. zooplankton—+fish +» Avdra — d. green plants—+bird ————+ fox

2. Among the animals through cormmensalisms-
i, one is benefited from the associates.
ii. though none of the associates is benefited but none is also harmed.
iil. both of the associates become benefited.

Which one of the following is correct?

al bide i
ce. Li & ii di. i, ti & iti

Answer to the questions 3 and 4 in the light of the figure given below-

| grasshopper
L =
_ aa +

Green plant ———» Small bird |——>| Snake ——> Eagle

Sy :

| Small bird |

Small Fish

3. How many food chains are there in the diagram mentioned above?
a. 1 b. 2
to d. 4

4, Inthe light of the stem which one is the consumer of second level?
a, Small fish b. Snake
c. Rabbit d. Grasshopper

deer—+ tiger b. saprophyte —+decomposer—+ Amoeba
' ene] oh See]

[ eesein plant|___» Small birel ——> | Fox |

Rabbit

SE

What are decomposers?
What is a food web? Write in detail.

ao a Fp

In which food chain in the food web mentioned above is the most energy spent?
Analyse what the consequences will be occurred in the ecosystem if the bird

in the food chain mentioned above is extinct.

©)

43

SS tote

25°C

se

What is biodiversity?

a i

diagram above.

Write in detail what you understand by commensalisms.
Explain the causes of difference in temperature in the figure mentioned above.
Analyse the impacts of the reactions caused by the process mentioned in the

2025
