Chapter Six
Effects of Heat on Matter

Heat is a kind of energy. From the concept of energy we may think that heat
flows always from higher heat energy to lower heat energy, but it is not true. In
which direction heat will flow, depends on the temperature. In this chapter we
will see how we can measure heat or temperature and what is the relation
between them.

Actually heat energy comes from the motion of molecules, atoms or their
vibrations. If the vibration of molecules of any solid object is increased to a great
extent, then molecules may go far from another one, that is, a change of state
may occur. In this chapter we will discuss the effect of heat on solids, liquids and
gases.

2025
Effect of Heat on Matter 161

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

explain heat and temperature.

explain the thermal properties of matter.

analyse the relationship among Fahrenheit, Celsius and Kelvin scale.
explain the increase in temperature with the increase of internal energy
of the substances.

explain the thermal expansion of substances.

explain the expansion in length, area and volume of a solid.

explain the real and apparent expansion of liquids.

explain specific heat and heat capacity.

explain the principle of measurement of heat.

explain the effect of heat in changing the state of matter.

explain melting, vaporization and condensation.

explain melting and boiling point.

explain the effect of pressure on melting point.

explain boiling and evaporation.

explain the latent heat of fusion and vaporization.

explain the cause of cooling and evaporation.

explain the influence of factors on vaporization.

Forma-21, Physics, Class 9-10
162 Physics

6.1 Heat and Temperature:

Heat is a kind of energy. We have seen that energy can do work. By applying
force it is possible to displace a body in the direction of the force, for example
heat is produced by burning fuel oil in a train or a car and this produced energy
creates motion in the train or car. So this new form of energy is called heat
energy like light, electricity or kinetic energy.

It is interesting that if we could see on the molecular level i.e., looking at any
substance if we see its molecules, we should call it "kinetic energy" instead of
the "heat energy". Because what we mean by heat energy is actually nothing but
the combined kinetic energy of the molecules of a substance. When the
molecules of a solid are heated then the molecules vibrate about their fixed
positions. The more the molecules are heated, the more the vibration increases.
If the molecules are heated enough the molecules become free by overcoming
the intermolecular forces among them. Then we call it a liquid. Then the
molecules move randomly among themselves. Since the molecules are in
motion, they have kinetic energy. The more the molecules are heated, the faster
they will move. If the molecules are heated more, they may be completely free
from their intermolecular forces. Then we call it a gas. The more a gas will be
heated, the faster its molecules will move. The more the velocity, the more the
kinetic energy.

Since we cannot see the molecules with our naked eyes, we cannot see their
movement, so we try to understand the whole thing indirectly, we call it heat
energy and try to explain the states of matter considering it as temperature. So
we can say that the energy which is obtained due to molecular vibration or
motion of a substance is called heat. As it is a form of energy like other energy,
so its unit is Joule (J). There is another unit of heat which is calorie (cal). The
amount of heat energy required to increase the temperature of 1 gm of water by
1° C is called 1 Calorie. 1 Calorie is equal to 4.2 J. You have heard about the
word “calorie” which is used in case of food. Food Calorie means actually the
amount of energy obtained from a definite quantity of food and the unit for this
is kcal or 1000 calorie. But we will not worry about this now. Here we will
discuss heat energy not energy gained from foods.

2025
2025

Effect of Heat on Matter 163
6.1.1 Internal Energy

If we accept heat as energy, the next thing we need to know how heat energy is
transferred from one place to another. Generally we think that energy always
flows from higher energy to lower energy. The amount of heat energy that is
contained in a glass of water is much more than that of a small hot pin. But if we
put the hot pin into the water, a small amount of the energy of the pin will
transfer to the water of the glass. Because of this, the flow of heat energy does
not depend on the amount of heat, it depends on the temperature. If two bodies
of different temperatures come in contact with each other, always heat transfers
from the body of higher temperature to
the body of lower temperature until the
temperature of the two bodies becomes
equal.

i

But we have not yet defined the
quantity called “temperature” yet. But
it is used so much in daily life that
nobody faces problems in
understanding what temperature
means. According to physics we can
say that it is the measure of average
kinetic energy of the molecules of
matter. From our experience we can
say that temperature is the thermal
state which indicates whether an object
absorbs or rejects heat when it comes in contact with another object. To
understand this, we can compare it with the height of the surface of water in
(Figure 6.01).

VAT Ee, Da POPS Na Ed TM AL PUG ad TEAM CA

SRG Fol TH Fle We) LA LY] PI (LS PAM ll] a LAT WD AD

Figure 6.01: Temperature is as like
the height of water and heat is as
like the volume of liquid

If the heights of the upper surface of water in the two containers are different,
and they are connected with a pipe, the flow of water will not be determined by
which container contains more or less water. Water flow will depend on the
height of the upper surface of water of the containers. Always water will flow
from higher height to lower height until the two heights become equal. Here we
can compare the amount of water with heat energy and the height of the surface
of water with temperature. It is also true in case of temperature that the heat
flows until the temperature of the two objects becomes the same.
164 Physics

6.2 Thermal Properties of matter

To measure the temperature special properties of special substances are used.
The property of a substance which changes with temperature and, measuring the
change accurately, the temperature can be measured, is called thermometric
property. The property of a substance which is used to measure the temperature
is called thermometric property. You have seen mercury thermometer that
measures our body temperature. Here mercury is the thermometric substance,
the volume expansion of mercury is its thermometric property.

There is also an alcohol thermometer except mercury thermometer in which
alcohol is the thermometric substance and the expansion of alcohol is the
thermometric property. In a gas thermometer, gas is the thermometric substance
and the pressure of the gas at constant volume is the thermometric property. As
the resistance of metal changes with temperature, so the resistance also is used
as the thermometric property. Different thermometric substances are effective at
different temperatures, so to measure the very high or very low temperature the
special thermometric property of a special thermometric substance has to be
used. Copper and Constantan metals are used as thermometric substances. If two
junctions of different metals (thermocouple) are kept at different temperatures,
it produces anemf and by measuring this, the temperature can be calculated. This
thermocouple is used in industries on a large scale because it can measure the

temperature from -200°C to 1000°C.

If we get the idea of temperature perfectly, we have to know its unit in
addition to, the important question of how we will measure the temperature. The
conventional unit of temperature is Celsius (°C), generally it is said that on this
scale at one atmospheric pressure and at the temperature at which ice melts is
called 0°C and at the temperature at which water boils is assumed to be 100°C.
But it is interesting to know that when scientist Celsius introduced this scale of
temperature, he assumed the temperature of boiling water as zero degree and the
temperature of fusion of ice as 100 degree; opposite to the present scale!

Although we use the Celsius scale of temperature in our daily lives, its
international unit is Kelvin (K). Adding 273.15°C with the reading of Celsius
scale we get the reading of Kelvin scale. If we consider only the difference of
temperature, there is no difference between Celsius and Kelvin scale. That is, the
increase in temperature by 10 °C is the same as the increase in temperature by

2025
2025

Effect of Heat on Matter 165

10 K. But if it is asked that what is the temperature of this room, the answer is
30 °C, but in Kelvin scale it will be (80+273.15) =303.15 K. You may think that
the two scales are completely same but the difference between the readings of
the two scales is 273.15 °C, what is the reason behind this? The reason behind
this is very wonderful. Generally, we may think that we can imagine any
ee temperature i.e., it may be very high or
very low, but actually it is not true.

il There is no problem in imagining a
4 temperature as high as you wish but it
L is not possible to imagine a
temperature as low as you wish. There
is a lowest temperature and any
temperature below this is not possible.
Not only this, we can reach near this
j temperature but we can never reach at
Hee Hio73.1sk Hi a0°e this temperature. This temperature is
called the absolute zero temperature.

| | | On Celsius scale the value of this
temperature is -273.15 °C. Therefore,

Figure 6.02: Celsius, Kelvin and in Kelvin scale its value is zero Kelvin.
Fahrenheit scales of temperature In other words it is said that the Kelvin
scale has been made considering the

absolute zero temperature as zero Kelvin.

‘| 100° c

|
— a ia |
Sta

To make any scale of temperature two certain temperatures (or fixed points) are
needed. In the Kelvin scale one is absolute zero which is taken as zero degree.
Another one is the triple point of water. At this temperature and at a certain
pressure (0.0060373 atm) ice, water and water vapour can exist together, so this
temperature can be defined very accurately. In the Celsius scale its value is 0.01
°C and to make the similarity with Celsius scale its value is 273.16° in Kelvin
scale.

Besides, the Kelvin and Celsius scales there is an another scale called the
Fahrenheit scale in which the temperature of fusion of ice and vaporization of
water are 32°F and 212°F respectively. In the figure 6.02 three scales are shown
for comparison, where 0 °C is equal to the temperature 273.15 K, sometimes
we take this as 273 K in our daily lives. This does not cause a major problem in
our daily lives.
166 Physics

6.2.1 Relation among different scales:

A definite temperature is expressed in the Celsius, Kelvin and Fahrenheits scale
as T., T, and T, respectively. Then we can write:

To-O T-273.15 — Ty—32
100-0 373.15—273.15 212-32

Or,
To Tx —273.15 Tr —32

100 ~=—Ss 100 180
The readings of Kelvin and Fahrenheit scales with respect to T,, will be respectively:

5 3
Te = 5 Tr — 32)

Example

Question: At which temperature are the readings in Celsius and Fahrenheit scales
equal?
Answer: The relation between Celsius and Fahrenheit scale is
5
To = 5 (Tr — 32°)
9T¢ = 5Ty —5 X 32°
If 7, and T, are equal then we get:
AT, = —5 x 32° = —160°
Tc = —40°
That is, the temperature which shows - 40° C the same temperature also
shows - 40° F.

Question: At which temperature are the readings in Kelvin and Fahrenheit scale
equal?
Answer: The relation between Kelvin and Fahrenheit scale is

5
Tx — 273.15° = 5 (Tp — 32°)

2025
2025

Effect of Heat on Matter 167

9T x — 9 X 273.15° = 5Tp —5 x 32°
If T, and T, are equal then we get,

AT x = 9 X 273.15° —5 x 32°
Ty = 574.59K

Question: What is the temperature in Celsius if the temperature of a healthy
body is 98.4 °F?
Answer: The relation between Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature is

5
Tc = = (Ty — 32°)
9
If T, = 98.4°, we get
5
Tce = 9 (98.4° — 32°) = 36.89°
(i.e., it is nearly equal to 37°C)
Question: At which temperature the readings in Celsius and Kelvin scale are

equal?
Answer: Never.

6.3 Thermal Expansion of Matter

6.3.1 Expansion of Solids:

Volume of almost all objects increases to some extent if they are heated. It is not
difficult to understand the cause of heat and temperature if we explain them with
the help of an atomic model. We can imagine a solid as a collection of many
molecules. We can compare the molecular forces among them with a spring. We
have imagined a spring among molecules to show how molecules are arranged
in a solid as shown in figure 6.03. When the solid is heated, its molecules will
vibrate. The higher the temperature, the more the molecules will vibrate. We
have to improve this spring model to some extent to explain the real nature of
168 Physics

solids. We have seen in case of a spring that the force by which it is pulled when
it is expanded to a certain distance, it pushes by the same force when it is
compressed by the same amount. This is not true completely for the molecules
of a solid. The amount of force by which molecules pull each other when they
are moved away to a certain distance they push themselves by much more force
when they are brought close to each other by the same distance. That is, this
spring is a special type of spring. Less force is applied to expand but more
force is applied to compress it.
Now imagine that the molecules are
vibrating due to a certain temperature.
For being a special type of spring during
vibrations molecules do not come very
near but can move further away. Now if
the solid is heated more and the
molecules will vibrate much more.
Already you have understood that since
the molecules cannot come very close
due to this special type of spring but can Figure 6.03: The molecules are
go very far easily, so all molecules will connected with each other by a
establish a new equilibrium to move imaginary spring.

away slightly from one another. When all molecules will move away from one
another, the whole solid seems to be expanded slightly.

Length, breadth and height of a solid are expand equally in three directions by
the application of heat. To analyze this expansion three quantities named
co-efficient of linear expansion, co-efficient of area expansion and co-efficient

of volume have been introduced.

Figure 6.04: Length, cross section and volume of a solid are increased by heating.

2025
Effect of Heat on Matter 169

If the length of an object is Z, at temperature 7, and the length is increased to L,
after increasing the temperature to T,, then the co-efficient of linear expansion
a is

_ (Lz ~ Ly) /L4
T, -T,
sO,

Ly = Ly + aL, (T, _- T,)

Similarly if the area of an object is A, at temperature 7, and increasing the
temperature 7, if the area is increased to A,, then the co-efficient of area
expansion 3 is

B= (Az — A1)/Ax
~ 1) —-T,

so,
Az =A,+ BA, (T2 —T;)

Again similarly if the volume is V, at temperature T, and if the volume is

increased to V,, then the co-efficient of expansion of volume is Y

_ (V, — V,)/V,
T, -T;
sO,
Vz =V, + wW,(T2 — T,)

You see that the unit of three quantities a, B and ¥ is K".

Dimension [a] = [8] = [y] =[T~*]

Question: The length of a steel rod is 10m at 20 °C. If its length becomes
10.0167 m at 120 °C, then determine the co-efficient of linear expansion of steel
Answer:

Co-efficient of linear expansion,

Forma-22, Physics, Class 9-10
170 Physics

Lz — Ly

a=

Ly (Tz — T;)
Here, L,=10m

Ly = 10.0167 m
T, = 120°C
T, = 20°C

_ 10.0167m — 10m
~ 10m(120 C — 20)

a = 16.7 x10-°°c?

You have seen from the above examples that actually the value of the co-
efficient of expansion of solids is very small. For this reason, the three different
co-efficients a, B and Y were not necessary. For working we could explain the

co-efficient of linear expansion only. For example let us assume the matter of
area expansion.

We see:
Az = Ay + BA, (T2 — T,)

But area A, is the product of length and width and if we consider the area of a
square whose length is L,, then its area, after increasing the temperature, will be

A, = 13 = [Ly + aly (T — T)]?
Or Ag = Li + 2aL4(T, — T) + a7 Li (T. — Ty)?

So, Ay = Ay + 2044 (Ty — Ty) + 02Ay (Ty — 1)?

We have seen that the value of a is very small, so the value of o? is smaller. In
fact it is so small that if we avoid the whole part with o”, then no problem will
arise in our analysis or calculation. So we can write:

Az = Ay + 2aA,(T2 _ T,)
But we know,
Az = A, + BA, (T, — T,)

2025
2025

Effect of Heat on Matter 171

Certainly we can write: B= 2a

Similarly we can assume a cube of Z length, width and height. Its volume at
temperature 7, is V, and the volume becomes JV, after increasing the temperature
to T,, so we have

V2 = [Ly + aL, (T, — T1)]?

According to the same argument, also here if we avoid the parts with o? and a’,
then no problem will arise in our analysis or calculation. So only the first two

terms will be present, i.e.
V2 = 13 + 3aL3 (T, _ T,) oo

But we know V, =73
That is > V2 = A + 3aV,(T2 _ T,)
So, Vz =V, + Vi (T2 -— 11)

Certainly we can write

y=3a

In our practical life we have to keep in mind the issue of expansion of solids. You
have seen the gap between the rails of rail tracks. This has been done taking
thermal expansion into consideration. If no space was left for expansion, the rail
lines would bend. Cavities develop in teeth due to lack of regular brushing. The
dentist fills these cavities with a special type of substance. The co-efficient of
expansion of the substance has been made very carefully which is equal to that
of the teeth. If the co-efficient of expansion were less than that of teeth, it would
come out from the cavity while eating something hot! Again, if the co-efficient
of expansion of the substance were greater, it would come out from the cavity of
the tooth while eating something cold! Many of the general people know the
matter of thermal expansion without studying physics. You will notice that when
the cork of a bottle is stuck, hot water is poured on it so that the cork becomes
loose after expansion of the bottle.
172 Physics

Example

Question: Why does a glass crack when hot water is poured in it?

Answer: More expansion occurs at different parts of glass when temperature is
increased suddenly, this is why the glass cracks.

Question: The density of gold is 19.30 gm/cc and co-efficient of linear
expansion is 14x10 °C.What will be the density when the temperature is
increased to 100 °C?

Answer:

‘ m
Density, paz

Here, V is volume and m is mass. Though the mass remains the same, the
volume increases when temperature is increased. So, if the temperature is
increased to 100° C, the volume will be :

V’ =V + W(T, —T,) =V(1+ 3a 100)
a=14x10 °c?
V'=V(1+4.2 x 1073)

-” m — 7 x 0.9958 = 0.9958
P= T= TF a2 10-3) ~ V * 019958 = 0.99589

p = 0.9958 x 19.30 gm/cc = 19.22 gm/cc

Question: What will be the density if the temperature is increased 1000°C more?

Answer: As the melting point of gold is 1064°C, gold will melt.

6.3.2. Expansion of liquid

Liquids have no length or area. Liquids have only volume. So the expansion of
a liquid means its volume expansion. While measuring the expansion of a
liquid, we have to be alert, because a liquid is kept in a container. To measure the
co-efficient of expansion when the liquid is heated, the container which is also

2025
2025

Effect of Heat on Matter

173

heated needs to be considered. So the expansion of a liquid in a container
observed is not real expansion, it is an apparent expansion. Therefore, to
measure the real expansion, the expansion of the container must be kept in mind

always. Usually, the expansion of liquids is more
than that of liquids. If it was not the case we could
not see the apparent expansion. It seems to be
apparent compression!

The most common example of the expansion of
liquid is a thermometer. There are many types of
thermometers, among them perhaps the clinical
thermometer (Figure 6.05) is the most familiar.

A glass tube contains mercury at the bottom. If heat
is applied, the volume of mercury is increased and it
goes up through the capillary tube. To what extent it
reaches is the measurement of the temperature.
While measuring the fever by a thermometer, it is to
be taken out from the mouth or the armpit, a very fine
curve is made at the bottom of the narrow tube. Due
to expansion, once the mercury level rises up, it
cannot come down even after decreasing the

temperature. Mercury is brought down by shaking.

Real and Apparent Expansion

im

)«— Fine curve
*— Mercury

Figure 6.05 : Fine curve
is made in tube, so that
mercury can not fall in

fever measuring
thermometer.

It has been said earlier that a liquid is always heated in a container. If heat is

applied, the expansion of the container occurrs along
with the liquid. So the expansion of a container is kept
in mind to measure the exact expansion of a liquid.
The expansion of a liquid, without considering the
expansion of the container, is called apparent
expansion. If the expansion of a liquid is measured
considering the expansion of the container, it is called
real expansion.

If a glass bulb with a long graduated stem is heated
liquid with filled up to mark A, first we observe that
the upper level of the liquid comes down to mark B
(figure 6.06). It will happen because due to the
application of heat the temperature of the bulb will
increase before increasing the temperature of the

oO Fr

Figure 6.06 : Real and
apparent expansion.
174 Physics

liquid, i.e., the bulb will expand a little bit.

After that if we continue applying heat, the height of the liquid will increase. As
the expansion of liquids is more than solids, we will observe that finally the level
of the liquid has reached mark C from B after passing the mark A.

If we multiply the height AB by the cross section of the tube, we will get the
expansion V,, of the bulb. Again if we multiply the height B, by the cross section,
we will get the real expansion V, of the liquid. Here the apparent expansion V,
is

6.3.3 Expansion of Gases

A solid has both shape and volume, so no problem arises in understanding the
expansion of the solid. Though a liquid has no definite shape, it has a definite
volume. So, we can explain or measure its expansion. It is very interesting in the

case of gas. Because neither does it

yy‘ have a definite shape nor a definite
y \ volume. A gas takes the whole
volume of its container. If the same

amount of a gas is kept in containers
of different volumes, the pressures
of the gases will be different. So, we

di can see that the increase of volume
of a gas will be measured without

changing its pressure as shown in the
figure 6.07. An object of definite

Figure 6.07 : The volume of air weight is placed on the piston of a

is increased by applying heat. cylinder so that it always applies
equal pressure to the gas contained

in the cylinder.
By applying pressure, liquids or solids cannot be compressed very much. But a

gas can be compressed very easily. Therefore, at first we have to know the
relation between the pressure and volume of a gas. It is called the ideal gas

2025
2025

Effect of Heat on Matter 175

equation and it is:
PV = mRT

Here P is pressure, Vis volume, 7 is the amount of gas (measured in mole), R is
a constant (8.314 JK! mol" ) and T is temperature in Kelvin scale.

Now we can find out the co-efficient of expansion of a gas. At a certain pressure
ifthe volume of a gas is V, at temperature 7, and the volume is V,, at temperature
T, the co-efficient of volume expansion B. of the gas will be:

pg, =a WIN,
P Tz — Ty
We know,
P A = nRT,
P V2 = nRT>
Hence

P(V, — V,) = nR(T, — T;)

Dividing the left side by PV, and the right side by nRT, we get:
Ww—-U R- Th

Vi Ty
So, V2 VM, _ 1
T,- 1, Ty
That is _i
? Bp — Ty

Therefore, you can see that the co-efficients of expansion of gases are not
constants at all. It is reciprocal to the temperature (7,'), i.e., the less the
temperature is the more the expansion of solid will be! In other words, at a
definite pressure and a definite temperature the amount of expansion due to
increase of temperature by one degree is less than the expansion due to increase
of temperature by one degree at the same pressure but at low temperature.
176 Physics

@) Do Yourself

Take two balloons, put a small amount of water into one of them and air of
the same volume in another one. Now put the two balloons under hot water
for a small interval of time. You will notice that the balloon containing water
remains the same, because the expansion of liquid due to heat is smaller but
the balloons containing air has expanded in volume to a large extent,
because the expansion of gas is much more higher than that of liquid.

6.4 Effect of Temperature in Change of State

Already you have know that all solids consist of molecules and in solids
molecules attract one another from a certain position. If heat is applied, their
vibrations increase and the molecular bonds become weak. They start to move
rolling upon one another and we call it a liquid. If the temperature is increased
further, the molecules start to move freely. We called it a gas. Now we observe
this more deeply and we will be introduced to different quantities which are
related to the change of state of matter.

When heat is applied to a solid, its temperature goes up. (we will know later at
what rate the temperature will rise and on what factor it depends.)

If the temperature (at a definite pressure) reaches a definite value, the solid starts
to melt. This process is called fusion and the temperature at which the fusion
starts is called the melting point. If we continue to measure the temperature,
surprisingly we will notice that when fusion has started, the temperature of the
mixture of some amount of solid and some amount of liquid does not increase
any more even if heat is applied (as shown in the figure 6.08). During this time
the heat is used to loosen the intermolecular bonds of the molecules in the solid.
So, the temperature cannot rise because applied heat cannot make the
molecules move further. During fusion at a definite melting point the amount of
heat which is used to convert the whole solid into liquid, is called the Latent Heat
of Fusion.

2025
Effect of Heat on Matter 177

On the solid being totally liquefied the temperature starts to increase again (as
shown in the figure 6.08). The temperature increases gradually and at one stage
the liquid starts to convert into gas. This process is called vaporization and the
temperature at which vaporization occurs is called the boiling point. Again,
everyone is being reminded that this boiling point depends upon pressure.

When the process of vaporization starts by absorbing the heat energy, the
molecules of the liquid start to become free from the molecular bonds among
themselves. Here also the temperature does not increase like fusion even if heat
is applied. During vaporization of liquid the amount of heat by which the whole
liquid is converted into a gas, that heat is called Latent Heat of Vaporization.

100)

80} ! jt

60} t—_}—_ 17
40; ‘iI FA
20 =

Time (s)

Tempereture (°C)

Figure 6.08 : Melting and boiling point does not change during heat.

After converting the whole liquid into a gas the temperature of the gas continues
to increase if heat is being applied. If the temperature is raised to
extremely high levels, the molecules will become ionized and a fourth state of
matter called plasma will start to form but this is something different.

All of us have seen at least one example of the process by which solids can be
converted into liquids and liquids into gases, that one is ice converted into water
and water into vapour. Although we do not see directly the latent heat of fusion
or latent heat of vaporization, but we have felt its effect. When we suddenly
come to an open place or in open air from a crowded or a closed place, then our
sweating body becomes cool. This is because during the vaporization of
sweat, the required latent heat of vaporization is absorbed from our body and our
body becomes cool. By applying heat solids can be converted into liquids and
liquids into gases, its reverse process also occurs. By extracting heat gas can be

Forma-23, Physics, Class 9-10
178 Physics

converted into liquids and liquids into solids. The process of converting a
gaseous substance from gaseous state to the liquid state is called liquification.
The process of converting a liquid substance from its liquid state to solid state is
called solidification.

During the change of state of matter, the transformation from solid to liquid and
from liquid to solid happens at a particular temperature. But without reaching
that particular temperature a substance can transform from solid to liquid, liquid
to gas or directly from solid to gas. It is not difficult to understand this if we go
back to the molecular model of a substance. If a molecule somehow gets
sufficient energy and due to this, its kinetic energy is increased sufficiently then
the molecule may come out from the surface of solid or liquid substance. Since
a large number of molecules from air are continuously striking the surface of
solid or liquid, so sometimes some of the molecules of solids or liquids may
obtain the required energy to become free. The more the surface area is, the
faster the process will be. All of us have seen this process e.g., a wet object dries
by itself. For this the temperature does not need to be at the boiling point. Drying
means the evaporation of the molecules of a liquid. This may happen at any
temperature and the process is called evaporation.

At the time of evaporation, water absorbs the latent heat of vaporization; the
reverse process is also true. If vapors transform into water by any process then it
delivers heat. During a cyclone the air filled with water vapour goes upwards,
when the vapor transforms into water the latent heat of vaporization is released
as energy. This energy acts as the source of the devastating energy of a cyclone.

Dependence of Vaporization

You have seen that wet clothes do not dry easily in the rainy season. On the other
hand in winter the clothes become dry naturally when they are kept inside the
house. After washing the clothes should be spread well for drying. If the wet
clothes are kept folded, they remain wet. The matter of drying of wet clothes is
nothing but the evaporation of water. So, you notice that the evaporation of
water depends on some factors. To speak the truth, what is true for water is also
true for other liquids. Therefore, we can make a list of the factors on which the
evaporation of liquids depends:

Flow of air: The rate of vaporization increases if the air flows faster over the
liquid.

The area of the exposed surface of the liquid: Evaporation increases as the
area of the exposed surface of the liquid increases. A glass of water takes quite

2025
2025

Effect of Heat on Matter 179

some time to evaporate but the same amount of water poured into a plate
evaporate much faster.

Nature of liquid: The less the boiling point of a liquid, the higher would be the
rate of evaporation. The rate of evaporation of volatile liquids is a maximum.
Pressure of air: The lower the pressure of air, the more the rate of evaporation.
The rate of evaporation in vacuum is a maximum, so air is taken out to make dry
food with a pump for preservation of the food.

Temperature: If the temperature of the air in contact with the liquid increases,
the rate of evaporation will increase.

Dryness of air: The drier the air over the liquid surface is, the more the liquid
evaporates.

6.5 Specific Heat

Heat, temperature and the relation between them are discussed so far, however the
amount of heat needed to increase the temperature of an object has not been discussed
yet. You might have noticed that in order to heat some water, it needs to be kept
on the oven for a long time, but approximately the same amount of metal take
little time to be heated at the same temperature. This is because, the specific heat
of a metal is much less compared to water. The amount of heat required to
increase the temperature of a body of mass 1 kg by 1 K is called the specific heat.
That is, if an amount of heat Q is required to increase the temperature from 7, to
T,, the specific heat will be:

Q

s = —
m(T2 — T;)

[The unit of specific heat-J kg4K7 |

Heat capacity C is the amount of heat required to increase the temperature 1K of
a body. The amount of heat required to increase the temperature 1K of a body of
mass 1 kg is called specific heat. So we can easily find out the heat capacity C of
a body if we know the specific heat of that substance. If the mass of an body is
m and the specific heat is s, then the heat capacity will be:
180 Physics

C=ms
The heat capacity of 10 kg gold is

C = 10x 230 JK? = 2300 JK?
In comparison the heat capacity of 10 kg water is

C =10x 4200 JK+ = 42,000JK* i.e. about 20 times more.

This means that gold or any other metal can be heated quickly but water cannot
be heated so easily.

6.6 Fundamental Principles of Calorimetry

In winter during a bath we often pour a little boiling water into a bucket of cold
water. The boiling water slowly become cold by giving up heat to the cold water.
The cold water of the bucket also slowly becomes hot by absorbing the heat
from the boiling water. Within a short time, all the water will get to a
comfortable temperature by decreasing the temperature of the boiling water and
increasing the temperature of the cold water. If we wish, we can find things like
the amount of heat lost or gained, and their final temperature when various
objects of various temperature are mixed together. To do so we just have to know
a few rules. They are:

(1) The body at higher temperature gives heat to the body at the lower
temperature until they reach thermal equilibrium.

(2) The amount of heat given up by the bodies at higher temperature will be
equal to the heat gained by the bodies at the lower temperature. (We assume
that no heat is lost in this process by any other means.)

Example

Question: A piece of ice of mass 100 gm is dropped into water of 1 liter at
temperature 30 °C. What will be the temperature of the water after melting the
whole piece of ice?

(Latent heat of ice L=334 kJ/kg)

2025
2025

Effect of Heat on Matter 181

Answer: Let us assume the temperature of ice is 0 °C.

Mass of ice m, = 100 gm = 0.1 kg
Mass of lliter water m2 = 1kg
Specific heat of water s = 4.2 x 103 Jkg?K*

The water of 1kg has to supply the heat that is required to melt the piece of ice
and to raise the temperature of the ice melted water to its final temperature. Let
us consider the final temperature of water is T, then the amount of heat absorbed
by the ice is:

Heat required to melt: mL

The heat required to increase the temperature from 0 °C to 7 after melting: m,s(T-0)
The mass of water m, supplies these amounts of heat, so its temperature will
decrease.

That is,

The heat supplied: m.s(30° C — T)
These two types of heat must be equal. Hence:
mL + m,sT = mzs(30 T — T)

_ 30°C Xmzs— mL
~ (m, + m,)s

7a BOX 1X42 x 108 — 0.1 x 334 x 10°

=20°C
(14+ 0.1)4.2 x 103

Question: What is the final temperature if 1 liter of water temperature 20 °C is added
to 2 liter water at temperature 75 °C?
Answer: Let us consider the final temperature is T, so the temperature of 2 liter of
water reaches T by decreasing the temperature from 75 °C. Absorbing this amount of
heat the temperature of 2 liter water reaches T by increasing the temperature from
20°C.
Hence

Mass of 1 liter water m, = 1 kg

Mass of 2 liter water mz = 2 kg
Specific heat of water s = 4.2 x 10? Jkg?K7
