2025

Chapter Five
State of Matter and Pressure

Everest winner Nishat Mojumder is breathing using oxygen cylinder at the peak of Mt. Everest

We are familiar with three states of matter- solids, liquids and gases. Among
them liquids and gases can flow so they are also called fluids. In this chapter we
will analyse and see how matter exerts pressure in its three states. Not only that,
elasticity is a special property of matter. We will also discuss how the property of
elasticity works in the solid, liquid and gaseous state.

Basides solid, liquid and gas, there is another state of matter named plasma, we
will also try to understand why this state is called the fourth state of matter.
128

Physics

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

explain the change of pressure with the change of force and area.
determine the expression for pressure at a point in a liquid at rest
explain the upward pressure on submerged bodies in a liquid
explain Pascal’s law.

demonstrate practical application of Pascal’s law

explain the theory of Archimedes.

explain the density.

explain the usage of density in our everyday lives.

explain why objects float on water.

explain the atmospheric pressure.

determine atmospheric pressure by using the height of the liquid column.

analyse the change of atmospheric pressure with the increase of height.
analyse the effect of change of atmospheric pressure on weather.
explain stress and strain.

explain Hooke’s law.

explain the molecular kinetic theory of matter.

explain the plasma state of matter.

2025
State of Matter and Pressure 129

5.1 Pressure

Though we use the word 'pressure' in our everyday conversation in many ways,
the word has a definite meaning in physics. We have talked about applying many
kinds of forces at different times in the previous chapters. But how the force will
be applied was untold. For example you can push a stone with your one hand,
two hands or with your whole body (Fig. 5.01). Though you apply the same
amount of force every time, the pressure will be different. In the first case you
applied force through the area of your palm. If your applied force is F, area of
your palm is A then the pressure

pul
A

: _N
Unit of pressure: —z oO Pa (Pascal)

Dimension of pressure [P] = ML~'T~2

Therefore, in the second case because of using two hands, the pressure will be
half as the area through which the force is being applied is doubled. In the third
case, you applied force through your whole body, so the area through which
force is applied will increase more and pressure will be decreased more.

Force is a vector, so you may think that pressure P is a vector! But the interesting
matter is pressure P is a scalar quantity and if we want to write it perfectly then
it should be written like as:

Figure 5.01: Pressure depends on the area through which force is applied

Forma-17, Physics, Class 9-10
130 Physics

Therefore, area itself is considered as a vector! A vector must have a magnitude
and the direction. The amount of area is the magnitade of vector, the
perpendicular on the area is the direction of the vector.

Since pressure is a scalar quantity, it has no direction. It is so necessary, because
the concept of pressure is more important for a liquid and gas than the solid.
When liquids and gases apply pressure then actually it does not depend on the
direction. We will see this matter very soon.

Example

Question: Let us assume your mass is 50 kg, area of one side of your body is 0.5
mand bottom area of your two legs is 0.03 m?. What pressures will you apply on
the floor when lying down and standing ?

Answer: Mass is 50 kg, therefore weight is: 50 x 9.8N = 490 N

490N_ ON

Pressure when lying down, p = 980 —
0.5 m2 m2

490N N

ressure when s ng, P 003 m2 16,333 m2

You see less pressure is applied when you are lying down. For this reason when
one falls in quicksand he has to lie down so that the applied pressure becomes
lower and he does not submerge quicksand.

Again the opposite is also true, if the area of force applied is less, then the
pressure increases. The area of the sharp edge of a nail is very small. So when
the sharp point of the nail is placed on a wood or wall and hammered on the flat
back head of the nail, the force exerts pressure through the sharp point on the
wood or wall. As the area of sharp edge of the nail is just a point so pressure is
very high and the nail can easily penetrate the wood or wall. This is also true in
the case of a knife. Its sharp edge is narrow, so it can apply more pressure and

2025
2025

State of Matter and Pressure 131

it is possible to cut easily. Another name of the unit of pressure is Pascal (Pa),
when 1 N force is applied on an area of 1 m’ we get 1 Pa (1 Pascal) pressure.

5.2 Density

We need to have a clear idea about density before understanding pressure of
liquids and gases. Density is the amount of mass per unit volume, i.e. if mass of
a body is m and volume is V, then density is:

PT

. . Table 5.01: Density of ibstan
Unit of density: kg/m’ or gm/cc ae ensify of some substances

Dimension of density: [P] = ML~3 substances density
(gm/cc)

Density of some familiar substances is Air 0.00127
given in table 5.01. Here is a good thing Cork 0.25
to remember, if temperature increases Wood 0.4 - 0.5
or decreases, volume ofa substance can Human body 0.995
be increased or decreased. Since there is Water 1.00
no change in the mass, the density of

. Glass 2.60
substance may change with
temperature. For this when we talk fron 7.80
about density of a substance, usually we Mercury 13.6
need to mention the temperature at Gold 19.30

which the density is measured.

Example

Question: 0.25 kg salt is dissolved in 1 kg water, so that the total volume becomes
1200 cc. What is the density of this water?

Answer: 1 cc is lcm’ therefore

1 cc =(107m)’ =10° mm?

132 Physics

1 kg + 0.25 kg

7200 x 10-6m3 ~ 104% 10° ke/m®

Density of the salted water: p=

Question: Density of Dead Sea water of Jordan is 1.24 kg/liter. What is the
volume of 1 kg water?

Answer: 1 liter is 1000 cc or 10° m? ,

Therefore, density of Dead sea water,

_ kg 1.24kg _ sa
p=124 7-3 a3 1.24 x 10° kgm
Therefore, volume of 1 kg water:
m 1kg 3.3
V= = 0.81 x 10-3 m

p 124x103 kgm?
or 0.81 liter

Example: What is the density of the nucleus? What is the mass of 1 tea
spoonful of nucleus?

Nucleus consists of neutrons and protons. The mass of one of them is 1.67 x 10-”” kg,
Their approximate radius is 1.25 fm = 1.25 x 107*5 m . Therefore, if we can
calculate the density of neutron or proton, it can be considered as the density of
the nucleus!

; m 1.67 x 10°27 kg 18 3
Density of nucleus, p= Int 4a = 0.204 x 10°8 kg/m
=r3) = (1.25 x 10-15 m)3
3 3
You need to guess how big this number is! One tea spoon contains

approximately 1 cc materials.

Therefore, mass of 1 tea spoon nucleus is:

m = 0.204 x 1078 kg/m? x 10-® m3 = 2 x 1011 kg

It is roughly the collective mass of all the people of the world.

2025
2025

State of Matter and Pressure 133

We can see it in another way. An atom has neutron-proton in its nucleus,
electrons remain outside. Mass of an electron is 1800 times less than the mass of
neutron-proton. Therefore mass of an atom is really the mass of its nucleus. It
does not matter too much electrons are not considered. But the things we see
around us, their shapes are not the volume of the nucleuses. Volume of the
substances come from the volume of their atoms. Electrons revolve around the
very tiny nucleus comparatively in a bigger orbit. Radius of an atom is nearly
1,00,000 times bigger than that of a nucleus.

Therefore, we can say in another way, if we can gather all the people of this world
and can create pressure to extract all nucleuses by breaking the atoms present in
their body and then if we put them together, these will be confined in a tea spoon.

5.2.1 Uses of Density in our Daily life

Density plays a vital role in our daily life. Sometimes we do not notice it
separately. For example, when we take water in a pot and hit it, after a while the
water starts to boil. It happens because when the water in the lower portion of the
pot becomes heated and expands, then its density decreases. As the density
becomes less, that water goes up and the cold water in the neighborhood comes
down. After some time this water also becomes heated and goes up and so within
a short period of time the water starts to boil. (The process of heating gas or
liquid in this way is called convection.) If density of water was not reduced after
heating, then it would not go up and we could only heat the water in the lower
part of the pot, by fire of the stove, and it would not be possible to heat the whole
water of the pot.

In intense sunshine in summer, those who have jumped into a pond have surely
noticed that though the surface water is hot but the bottom water is cold. Here
the heat comes from above and after heating, the top water density decreases and
remains above, the whole water of the pond can not be heated uniformly.

We have seen the balloons flying at the inauguration of various events. In order
to make balloons fly we need to insert gases lighter than air. Considering safety
they should be filled with inert helium gas, but helium gas is comparatively
expensive; so frequently it is done with hydrogen gas which is very dangerous.
Not only that, as methane gas is lighter than air, which is used as a fuel is
134 Physics

sometimes used also to fill the balloons, which is similarly dangerous!

We have often seen air balloons. Fires are lit under the balloons, which heat the
air inside and make it lighter and this helps lift the balloon up.

We can determine whether the eggs are good or rotten by submerging them in
water. If the eggs have gone bad their density becomes lower than that of water
and they start to float.

5.3 Pressure in liquids

Those who have jumped in water, they all know, after going into deep water a
pressure is felt. (Though atmosphere applies a pressure on us but we don’t feel
it, because our body also applies the same pressure.) Exactly what amount of
pressure will be felt after going in deep water or any other fluid is already been
mentioned. The pressure on you will have to be calculated from the weight of the
column of liquid on you. Let us suppose that you want to determine the pressure
of the liquid at depth h. Imagine an area A there (Figure 5.02). The weight of the
column of liquid above this area will exert a force on A.

Volume of the liquid over a surface area
A is Ah. If the density of the liquid is p ——
then weight of this liquid or force is, EE
F = mg = (Ahp)g
Therefore pressure, h

F  Ahpg
Paa- a hes

Therefore, in a liquid of fixed density, SO’

pressure rises with the increase of depth.
In case of water, approximately for a ten
meter increase in depth, the pressure
increases by an amount equal to the
air pressure ( atmospheric pressure) ,;which is 101325 Pa.

Figure 5.02: Pressure is created on
the lower surface due to the height
of the liquid.

2025
2025

State of Matter and Pressure 135

Density can be increased by compressing air or gas by increasing pressure but same
is not true for liquids (neither for solids !). Liquids cannot be compressed in the
same way with pressure, so its density cannot be increased or decreased. How
pressure of water is increases when we go from the surface to the bottom of a sea
is shown in figure 5.03. Since the density of water is nearly uniform, the
pressure is increasing at the same rate. Starting from zero at the surface of the
sea, it is increased a lot at the bottom of the sea.

500

400

300

200

water pressure (Atm.)

100

0 1 2 3 4 5 6
depth (km)

Figure 5.03: Pressure increases with the increase of depth

Question: The whale can go into a depth of 2,100 m from the sea level. How
much pressure can it sustain? Assume that 1 atm pressure is increased per

10 m depth

Answer: The whale can sustain the pressure,
2,100 m

= 70 m/atm m/atm = 210 atm
136 Physics

Question: Under water, pressure increases by 1 atm for a 33 ft (10 m) increase
of depth. The divers have gone a maximum depth of 1000 ft (330 m) , how much
pressure did they have to tolerate?

Answer: Per 10 m depth, pressure increases by 1 atm or | bar. Then, for 330 m

depth, 330m

10 m/atm = 33 atm

Divers had to tolerate 33 atm pressure.

Question: Calculate the pressure at a depth of 50 cm for kerosene (density 800
kg m), water (density 1000 kg m?) and mercury (density 13600 kg m°).

Answer: For kerosene,

pressure, p= hpg

P = 0.50 m x 800 kg m® x 9.8 N kg"! = 3,920 N m~*
For water,
P = 0.50 m x 1000 kg m? x 9.8 Nkg™ = 4,900 Nm?

For mercury,

P = 0.50 m x 13,600 kg m® x 9.8 Nkg? = 666,40N m2

Question: At what depth of the liquids kerosene, water and mercury pressure
will be 1 atm ?

Answer: We know, for mercury pressure is latm at a depth of 76 cm. Density
of water is 13.6 times less than mercury, therefore depth of water will be 13.6
times more.

Therefore, depth for water: 76 cm x 13.6 = 1034 cm = 10.34m

Density of kerosene is 0.8 times less than water, therefore depth for kerosene
will be 1/0.8=1.25 times more.
Therefore, depth for kerosene: 10.34 m x 1.25 = 12.92m

2025
State of Matter and Pressure 137

5.3.1 Archimedes principle and

Buoyancy

It is sure all of you know

Archimedes principle and the story

behind this. The principle is easy,

‘If a body is immersed in a liquid,

the weight of the body is reduced by

an amount equal to the displaced
liquid’. Now we’ll find this principle.
A cylinder is immersed in some

amount of liquid is shown in figure

5.04 (This can be any object of any

shape, but for convenience of
calculation we took a cylinder). Let
us suppose that the height of the Figure 5.04: The weight of a body is

cylinder is A, cross-sectional area of reduced by an amount equal to the weight

top and bottom of the cylinder is A. of the displaced water.

We imagine that the cylinder is

immersed in such a way that the depth of upper surface is h, and depth of lower
surface is h,.

We have said many times that, pressure in a liquid (or gaseous) does not work in
a definite direction. It works in all directions. Therefore the downward pressure
acting on the upper surface of the cylinder is:

P, = hypg
and the upward pressure acting on lower surface is:
P2 = hopg

Therefore, the downward force acting on upper surface and upward force acting
on lower surface are respectively:

F, = AP, = Ahipg
F, = AP, = Ahzpg

We do not have to think about how much force is exerted on the surrounding
surface, because the force experienced by the cylinder from one direction is
equal and opposite to the force from another direction and neutralize one anoth-
er.

Forma-18, Physics, Class 9-10
138 Physics

As the value of /, is greater than h,, so we see the value of F,, is greater than
F.

1
Therefore the resultant force will be upwards and its value will be:

F =F, —F, = A(h, —h,)pg

F = Ahog
As Ah is the volume of the cylinder, P is the density of the liquid and g is
gravitational acceleration, therefore the force exerted upwards is equal to the
weight of the liquid which has the same volume as the cylinder. This is precisely
known as the Archimedes principle. The upwards force is called buoyancy.

@) Do Yourself

Tie a big size potato or a fruit at one end of a rubber band and hang it,
see how it is elongated. Now let the potato or the fruit be immersed into
water, you will see the rubber band is compressed slightly. Because in the
immersed condition the weight of the potato or fruit is less!

5.3.2: Floatation and Immersion of a Body

You have surely understood why an object floats and why an other object is
immersed. You know an object experiences an upward force due to buoyancy
which is equal to the weight of the water displaced by the object when it is
immersed in water. The object will float if that force is greater than the weight of
the object.

Just the portion of the object which is immersed so that it will displace water
equal to the weight of the body, only that portion will be immersed exactly, the
remaining part will not be immersed in water.

If the weight of the body is greater than the weight of the displaced water the
body will sink in water. But it seems that the weight of the body when immersed
is less than its real weight.

If the weight of displaced water can be made just equal to the weight of the
object anyway, then the object remains there where it is put in water, it will not
float above or even sink below. In our everyday life though it is not seen by us
but for the movement of the submarine under water this is done.

2025
2025

State of Matter and Pressure 139

Example

Question: If a piece of wood floats on water what percent of it will be
immersed? (Density of wood p= 0.5x10?kg/m* density of water

Py = 10 kg/m)
Answer: In order to float, the weight of the wood must be equal to the mass of the
water displaced by the immersed part of the wood. That is, if volume of wood is

V then its mass will be Vp, and if the volume of the immersed part of the wood
is V,, the mass of that amount of water is V,p,,

Therefore, Vo=Vip,

V, pep 05x 10% kg/m? ;
Vi py 10? kg/m? * 100 = 90%

Question: A piece of wood of mass 10 kg went to sea floating from the river. In
the river water it was half immersed, how much of it will immerse in the sea?

(Density of sea water, P, = 1.03 x 10°kg/m?)

Answer: Density of river water Py = 10° kg/m?

If volume of wood is V and density is P then mass of wood will be Vp

. . . 1
In river water the wood is half immersed Vp = 3 Vey

1
therefore, P= 5 Pw = 0.5 x 10? kg/m?

Ifitis immersed by V, amount in the sea water,
Vp =Vip,

V,  p _ 0.5 x 103 kg/m?

nh P “nee
Vp, 1.03 x 103 kg/m3 x 100 = 48.5%

140 Physics

Question: Let’s suppose the mass of the gold crown of Archimedes is 10 kg in
air and 9.4 kg when immersed in water. What is the density of the crown?

Answer: If the volume of the crown is V and density is ? then
Vp = 10kg
Vp—Vpy = 94kg

Vp, = Vp— 9Akg = 10 kg — 9.4 kg = 0.6 kg

0.6k 0.6 k
y a oS g

= = -3 m3
a, 7 OF kg/ms = 0.6% 10"? m

_ 10kg 10 kg
~ VY ~ 0.6x10-3m

= 3
3 = 16,666 kg/m

Real density of gold is 19,300 kg/m°, therefore it is understood that the crown is
mixed by impurities.

5.3.4 Pascal’s Law

We have shown many times in this chapter that if pressure is applied on a liquid,
it is transmitted towards all directions. You will understand that it is normal if
you think a bit. Because if the pressure is not transmitted into the whole liquid
then the pressure experienced in one part will be more and it will be less in
another part. Therefore if we imagine a cross sectional area then force applied
from one direction will be more than the force from an other direction and due
to this force the liquid will flow until the pressure becomes equal. Pascal
expressed this in the form of a law, that is stated below:

Pascal’s Law: If pressure is applied on a liquid or a gas enclosed in a
container from outside, then this pressure is transmitted equally and acts
perpendicularly on the surface of the container in contact with the liquid or
gas.

2025
2025

State of Matter and Pressure 141
Applications of Pascal’s Law:

Using Pascal’s law some interesting machines can be fabricated. In figure 5.05 a
machine like that is shown. Here two cylinders are connected by a pipe. Let’s
suppose cross sectional area of one cylinder is 4, and that of another cylinder A,
, and you have applied force F, on the cylinder of cross sectional area A ,.Then
your applied pressure IS F,

~ Ay

Now this pressure is transmitted through the liquid in all directions and it will
also be applied on the cross sectional area of the second cylinder.

Therefore the amount of force applied on the second cylinder will be

Fo =PA =F, (2)
2 2 1 Ay

tr i i

Figure 5.05: Force F, is obtained by
applying force F’, which depends on the

cross section on which the force is
applied.

142 Physics

Therefore, you see amazingly that ifthe magnitude of (4,/A,) is 100 then you
will get 100 times more force on the second cylinder than the force you

applied on the first cylinder!

This process is very effective and used to control very large factories and
aircrafts. But keep in mind; it is the principle of increasing forces. In this
process energy cannot be increased ail. You will get back the same amount
of energy on the second cylinder that you have applied on the first cylinder.

Example

Question: Show that you are getting back the same amount of energy which is
applied though force is increased.

Answer: Let’s suppose force F’, is applied on the smaller piston and the piston
moves by a distance 1,.

Therefore, amount of work done W, = Fl,

Force on the bigger piston fF, = F, (2)
1

As the water displaced by the smaller piston moves the larger piston by a
distance 1, by pushing, therefore

LA, = L,Ao

A
Distance travelled by the larger piston: 1, = l, (3)
2

A A
Therefore, amount of work done: W, = Fol, = Fy (2) L (2) = F,l,
1 2

i.e equal to the work done by the smaller piston.

2025
2025

State of Matter and Pressure 143

5.4 Air Pressure

Air has a certain pressure (Figure: 5.06). We do not feel this pressure distinctly
because a pressure is also exerted outside from inside of our bodies. So these two
pressures neutralize one another. There is no air in space, so there is no pressure
of air, so there is nothing to neutralize the inner pressure of our body and in such
an environment human bodies may explode instantly due to this inner pressure.
For this reason the astronauts always wear pressure protected space suits. The
pressure on the earth surface is 10°M/m?, which means if you imagine an area of
1m? on the earth surface, then the weight of the column of air on it is 10°N, this
is approximately the weight of an elephant !

Here, you have to understand something very clearly. It is true, weight is a force
and this force acts downwards. Force is a vector, so it has both magnitude and
direction. Pressure is not a vector, it has no
direction, so it is same in all directions at any
place. The place where you are standing or sitting
now, the pressure which air exerts on you is the

same in left , right , up, down or in all directions. < [>
It is true for air or liquid for all times.

If an air-tight casket made of thin tin or
aluminum can be made airless in any way, then it
will be folded or twisted, because in normal
condition, the outer air pressure was balanced by ~~ _a_!£
inner air pressure of the casket in turn. After i a
evacuating the inside air by pumping, there is Figure 5.06: The pressure
nothing inside to resist the outer air pressure. So of air comes from the
the outer air pressure will twist the casket weight of the air column.

(figure 5.07).

Air column

144 Physics

You will observe that the casket will not be twisted only from the upper side, it
will be twisted from all directions. If the pressure comes only from the upper
side the casket will be twisted only from the upper side. As the pressure is same
in all directions, so it comes from all directions, and the casket is twisted from
all directions.

(a) (b) (c)
Figure 5.07: (a) After evacuating the air from the cube shown in (a) by pumping,
if the air exerts pressure only from the upper side, the cube would become flat as
shown in (b). But the pressure comes from all directions so the cube is compressed
as like the picture shown in (c)

@) Do Yourself

/“Texe an empty one liter water

plastic bottle. Pour some boiling
water carefully in the bottle and
shake the water. When the whole
air inside the bottle becomes hot,
close the cap of the bottle tightly.
Now wait for a while or keep the
bottle in the flow of cold water
and make it cold. Some vacancy
will be created inside the bottle
and it will be folded and twisted

; due to the pressure of the outside
Figure 5.08: Due to air pressure

the water bottle is folded and air. (Figure. 5.08)
twisted

2025
State of Matter and Pressure 145

The pressure on the surface of the earth originates from the weight of the air
column. So if we rise above then the height of the air column above us will
decrease, the weight will also decrease, due to this the air pressure will also
decrease there. The matter is true and how this air pressure decreases with height
is shown in Figure 5.09. What you have to observe separately is that the air
pressure has decreased by half after reaching a height of five kilometer.
Generally, one may ask by reduction of pressure why does it not become zero
after the next five kilometer? There is a specific reason behind it. Air or gas can
be compressed by putting a pressure. So on the surface of the earth, air becomes
most compressed where the air pressure is maximum i.e. the density of air is
maximum there. As we go above, the pressure of air will reduce, density of air
will decrease as well.

There are many practical aspects of reducing density of the air with height.

When a plane flies in the

sky, the friction of air acts

asabigproblem.Thehigher — 4

we go, the density of wind E oa

will be reduced, and friction ‘Fy a

will also be reduced. Therefore, @ °°)

really big planes try to fly & 04) —

through as high as possible P| 02 |

in the sky. Generally it may Ea
seem that why do the planes 0 5 100 15 20 285

not fly height at very big as Height (km)

then the friction will be
decreased further. The
reason is that the planes
need powerful engines to fly and oxygen is required to burn the fuel of those
engines. The amount of oxygen is less where the density of air is less as at great
heights. So at higher altitudes the engine of the plane will not work due to the
shortage of oxygen.

Those who climb to the peak of mountains face the same problem. The higher
they climb the problem of less oxygen due to reducing density of air is more than
the problem of less air pressure. For this reason those who climb mountains have
to practice not only how to survive in less oxygen but also have to learn how to

Figure 5.09: Air pressure reduces with height.

Forma-19, Physics, Class 9-10
146 Physics

do very hard job like mountain-climbing. So, they have to prepare their bodies.

Example

Question: How much oxygen is there at the peak (29,029 ft) of the Everest?

Answer: 29,029 ft = 8,848 m

We see from the graph that the pressure of the air at this height is only 35%
of the pressure of air at the earth’s surface. Therefore the amount of oxygen
there is approximately 1/3 of the oxygen on the earth surface.

5.4.1: Experiment of Torricelli

You have surely had cold drinks with straws. Have you ever thought how the
cold drinks reaches your mouth when you sip? Really this occurs due to the
pressure of the air. It would be very easy to understand if you try to drink the
cold drinks with a 10.5 meter long straw. (This is not realistic at all. But
acknowledge it for the sake of argument!) Then you would discover that the
drinks rise 10.3 meter and stop suddenly. No matter how much you try the drinks
do not rise any more. (We are assuming that the density of cold drinks is close to
the density of water!)

Mercury is not a liquid to take into mouth but for the sake of argument imagine
you try to sip it to get it in your mouth with a straw. If the straw is longer than 76
cm, you will discover that the mercury has stopped just after rising 76 cm.
You try to sip the mercury does not rise any more! Density of mercury is 13.6
times more than the density of water, so elevated levels of more but the mercury
is 13.6 times lesser than the water.

Cold drinks will not rise up through a straw normally if we take a straw in the
mouth and put it into the bottle. Because the air pressure within your mouth is
the same as the air pressure of the liquid in which the straw is immersed. The two
pressures are equal so there is no effective force inside it. Now if you sip, which
means you try to create a vacancy in your mouth, then the air pressure becomes
low there. Then the liquid comes above through the straw due to the air pressure
on the liquid surface.

2025
2025

State of Matter and Pressure 147

Scientist Torricelli did this experiment of the pressure of air using mercury in the
year 1643. He did not try to make the mercury rise with a straw by mouth. He
filled a one ended tube with mercury and he put it in a mercury filled container
in an inverted way. After falling a
continuously the mercury stopped at a height

of 76 cm. The vacancy which you try to
create while sipping liquid, this vacancy was
created in the upper portion of the glass tube.
Air is exerting pressure on the mercury and
that pressure being transmitted everywhere
of the liquid, even down the tube. There is no
leakage above the tube, so air cannot exert 76:cm
pressure through that side. Therefore to
equalize the pressure there is only a pressure
under the tube, which is the pressure due to
the weight of 76 cm mercury column!

The instrument by which air pressure is |
measured is called a barometer (Figure: | |
5.10) and till now the pressure of the air is

measured by a barometer which uses the Figure 5.10: Mercury
process of Torricelli. The height of the becomes stationary just at 76
mercury column becomes more than 76 cm if cm height due to air pressure.
the air pressure increases and if pressure decreases the height become less than
76 cm.

5.4.2 Air Pressure and Weather

Weather has a close relationship with air pressure. You have certainly heard
many times in weather news about the creation of depression in the sea, which
means air pressure has been decreased there. Then air starts to come from the
nearby areas of high pressure to the low pressure area and sometimes a spin is
created, in special situation that spin creates cyclone. You certainly know the
news of horrible cyclones in our country.

When you will read about heat and temperature in the next chapter, you will
know that if the temperature of air is increased, then it expands, as a result
density and pressure decrease. Air pressure decreases more effectively if the
148 Physics

amount of vapor inside it increases. Vapor is water, in a molecule of water there
is an oxygen and two hydrogen atom and molecular mass of water is
(16+1+1=) 18. The main element of air is nitrogen (atomic mass 14), being
created by two atoms it’s molecular mass is (14+14=) 28 and oxygen (molecu-
lar weight 16), is also created by two atoms, so, it’s molecular mass is (16+16=)
32, which is much more than the molecular mass of water. So, when there is
vapor in the air, water of less molecular mass takes the place of nitrogen and
oxygen of higher molecular mass and so the density of air decreases. If the
density of air decreases, the air pressure also decreases. So, it is possible to
predict about the local weather seeing the air pressure on a barometer. If the
barometer shows high pressure then it is understood that the air is dry and the
weather is good. If the pressure starts to decrease then it is understood that the
quantity of vapor is increasing. If pressure low then air from the nearby areas
will come quickly and storm and rain will start.

5.5 Elasticity

All of you must have, one time or another, elongated a spring or a rubber band
by pulling on it and then releasing it. You have certainly noticed that after
releasing the spring or the rubber band it regains its previous length. In physics,
pulling is termed as ‘applying force’ and the change of the length is termed as
‘deformation’. The word deformation is taken negatively in our daily life. But
you should not take it negatively here. It is just a change in condition!

Therefore, you understand that when a force is applied to an object, a
deformation happens inside it (and for this deformation, a counter force is
created). If the force is withdrawn, deformation stops and the object comes back
to its initial condition. This property of a substance is called elasticity. But it
should be remembered that the quantity of the applied force has a limit. If the
limit is crossed, the substance will not be able to come back to its initial
condition. A permanent deformation could take place. This limit is termed as the
elastic limit. After bending a rod slightly, if it is released then it becomes straight.
If it is bent too much then it remains curved and does not become straight.
Therefore we can state this like:

Strain: The relative change in length or shape which is made by applying a force
from outside is called strain. Therefore, if force is applied on an object of
length L, , and the changed length becomes L then it’s strain is: L— Lo

Lo

2025
2025

State of Matter and Pressure 149

It is seen that the deformation has no

unit, it is only a number.
Stress: The force per unit area that ,
develops within a substance due to Le
deformation is called stress. T L
If a force is applied on a body of cross T
sectional area A and as a result
deformation occurs, then if this ——
deformation develops a resistive force a
F, then stress is: [ \
F |
A
You see it is similar to pressure and its Figure 5.11: Deformation occurs in
unit is Pa or Pascal. a bar if stress is created by applied
force.

Hooke’s law: If we have understood stress and strain, it is easy to
understand Hooke’s law. According to this law, ‘within elastic limits stress
is directly proportional to strain’.

stress & strain

Therefore,
Stress = constant x Strain.

That is, there is a constant relating stress to strain for each material; the name of
this constant is modulus of elasticity.

It will be easy to understand if we discuss two things:

(i) Let us suppose that the length of a wire of cross-sectional area Ais L, ,
a body of weight W is hanged from it and due to this hanged force the wire is
elongated from LZ, to ZL (Figure 5.11). This elongated length creates a counter
force T in the wire (Here the letter 7 is used to mean the word ‘tension’.
Generally, when a wire is pulled then the force acting in it is named as tension).
Therefore Stress is 7/A and strainis L-— Ly

Lo

150 Physics

Table 5.02: Young’s modulus of different substances

Therefore, J “ L — Substance G-Pa
Rubber 0.01-0.1
Bone 9

Or, = y (" —*) Wood 10
Glas 50 - 90
Aluminum 69
Cupper 117
Tron 200
Diamond 1220

Here, Y is a constant. The name of this constant is Young’s modulus. As strain
has no unit, the unit of Y is Nm? Young’s modulus of some substances are given
in the table 5.02.

Example

Question: How does the length of a substance change with the change of the value
of the Young’s modulus?
Answer: Rate of change of length

toto _4 (2)
Lo  Y

Therefore, if 7/A remains the same, the higher the value of Y is, change in length
will be less.

(ii) | Let us consider, in normal condition a gas of volume V, is contained in a
cylinder.

Due to the application of pressure P, its volume is reduced to V (Figure 5.12).
Here P is the stress and the Strain is: yp _ Vo

Vo

2025
2025

State of Matter and Pressure 151

Therefore, we can write

Pe (— “*)
Vo

V- “*)
Vo

P=B

Here B is a constant and is called the bulk modulus of elasticity. Unit of B is Nm?
or Pascal.

Figure 5.12: If pressure is applied in confined air, the air is compressed.

5.6 Three States of Matter: Solid, Liquid and Gas

You certainly know that, everything of the universe is made of molecules!
(In fact, molecules are not fundamental particles, molecules consist of atoms,
atom consists of electros and nucleus, nucleus consists of protons and neutrons,
proton and neutron consists of quarks and the scientists are assuming that
electrons or quarks are made of strings!). Since, the properties of a matter exist
in molecules, molecules are considered the smallest unit of matter. For example,
all properties of water exist in a water molecule, but when it is split into atoms it
does not exist as water. There will be one oxygen and two hydrogen atoms, both
in the gas form. Whether the substance is solid, liquid or gas depends on how
molecules are arranged within the matter (Figure: 5 .13). The most
152 Physics

familiar example of it is water; it can exist in three states, e.g. solid, liquid and
gas. Whether it is ice, water or vapor depends on how the molecules are within
it.

When a substance remains in the gaseous state, then its molecules are free, the
distance between one another is very large. When the substance is in a liquid
state, then though the molecule remains comparatively closer but they can move
with respect to one another. In solid state, molecules remain the closest, but can
not move with respect to the other.

@ iS) Pals
@
@ al o

Figure 5.13: (a) solid (b) liquid (c) gas.

The distance among the molecules of a gas are very large. Those substances have
no regular volume and shape. Molecules in a liquid remains closer and they have
a particular volume but no regular shape. In a solid, molecules are very close and
they are almost in contact with each other, so they have a definite volume and a
regular shape.

In a gas, molecule can move freely, in liquids the molecules vibrate, and one can
pass through from one side to the other, in solids though the molecules can
vibrate but they can not change their position.

Normally we cannot see the molecules of solids, liquids or gases, we see it as
solid, liquid or gas. The properties of molecules which have been mentioned
above, are exhibited in their solid, liquid or gaseous state too.

2025
State of Matter and Pressure 153

Gas : Molecular properties Reflection in gases

Spread through the total volume of the

container in which it is kept.
Distance among the molecules is | Gas can be compressed by pressure
more, there exists vacant space

A molecule can move with respect to | Gas can flow easily

Molecules can move beside one another

another

Liquid: Molecular properties Reflection in liquids

Molecules can move beside one Can flow easily, gain the shape of the
another container in which it is kept.
Molecules are very close together | Liquid cannot be compressed by
so there is no vacant space applying pressure

Solid : Molecular properties Reflection in solids

Molecules are rigid in their own There is a definite shape

position

There is almost no distance among) Can not be compressed by pressure
the molecules

Molecules are confined to their own | Cannot be made to flow

positions

5.6.1 Molecular Kinetic Theory of Matter

If a solid substance is kept on a table, the solid exerts a kind of pressure on the table, on
the area of the table which it touches. If we want to put some liquid on the table instead
of solid, it will not work; the liquid will spread over the table. Liquids have to be
contained in a pot and the liquid exerts pressure not only on the bottom of the container
but it exerts pressure on the walls of the container in all directions. (If a hole is created in
the wall of the container, the liquid will come out through this hole due to the pressure of
liquid.) If we want to put gas then it is not possible to put it in a open container, then it is
to be stored in a bound region and the gas will exert pressure on the bound surface in all
directions. Gas is contained in a balloon. If we make a hole on a balloon, air will come
out through this hole due to the air pressure.

Forma-20, Physics, Class 9-10
154 Physics

@) Do Yourself

Put a piece of scotch tap on an air filled balloon. Now make a hole on the
balloon through the scotch tap with a needle. You will see that the balloon
does not burst but air is coming out.

We mentioned about pressure of gas but didn’t explain its reason. We can
explain the reason of pressure by the molecular kinetic theory. If a gas is kept in
a closed space then it puts a pressure on the walls of the container, this can be
explained with the help of the molecular kinetic theory of substance. In a closed
region the molecules of a gas starts moving randomly and every time it hits the
walls of the container it goes back due to reflection. Therefore a gas molecule
hits the wall with a particular momentum, and returns back with a different
momentum. You know to change the momentum of an object; a force has to be
applied on that object. Hitting the wall, the gas molecules apply a force on the
wall. According to Newton’s third law, the wall also applies a counter force on
the molecule thus reflecting the molecule.

An enormous number of molecules thus hit the walls of the container and this
combined force appears as the pressure of the gas.If the temperature of the gas is
increased, then the kinetic energies of the molecules will increase and the
molecules will hit the wall harder. This means the pressure will be increased.
We will see in the next chapter that due to the application of heat, temperature
increases and as a result pressure also increases.

5.6.2 Fourth State of Substance

Despite solids, liquids and gases, the three different sates of matter, substances
may have a fourth state named plasma. We know the number of the positively
charged protons in the nucleus of a molecule or an atom is equal to the number
of negatively charged electrons outside it. That’s why the combined charge of a
molecule or atom is zero. Under special conditions a molecule or an atom can be
ionized, one or more electrons of some atoms can be made free, then separately
the atoms do not remain charge neutral. A kind of a mixture of ions and electrons
is made. Though it stays like a gas but all of the properties of gas are not true for
it. Like we know, a gas has no fixed shape but a fixed shape of plasma can be
made by a magnetic field.

2025
2025

State of Matter and Pressure 155

Gases can be turned into plasma by giving excessive heat; plasma also be made
by a powerful electric field. In our house, plasma is created in a tube light. There
is also plasma in the luminous advertisement of neon light. The light which is
seen during thunder is also plasma and the substances which remain in the far
stars is also in the plasma state. At present, we use nuclear energy in fission
process by breaking a heavy nucleus. We try to use plasma for creating energy in
fusion process combining the light nucleuses and now this is a very important
field of research in physics.

@) Do Yourself

Density of a substance

Objective: Determine the density of a substance
Apparatus: Spring balance, a solid which can sink in water, water in a pot.
Theory: Dividing the mass of a body by its volume, density is measured.
Mass of the body can be measured by a spring balance. It is possible to
determine the volume of the body using the Archimedes law. After
immersion, the decrease of the mass in grams is the volume in cc (cm).
Procedure: 1. Determine the mass of a body using a spring balance.
2. Tie the body with a thread and hang it from a spring balance
and determine the weight keeping the body inside the water.
3. Determine the density of the body.

Table: To determine the density of the matter

Number of | Mass of the | Weight of the Volume | Density of

observaions solid substance| solid substance} of the solid |the substance

M, gm when immersed 3 Mi _ gm
M, gm-wt | Mi-M, cm M,—M cm3

Ne w,

156 Physics

(?) Exercise

General questions

1. A piece of ice is floating in glass water,
once the ice melts the height of water is
glass will increase of decrease?

2. Suppose you sit on a boat in a
swimming pool with a big stone. You drop
the stone in the water of the swimming
pool from the boat. The height of the
water in the swimming pool will increase
or decrease or remain the same?

Figure 5.14: A Hermit is sitting on
a bed of nails.

3. Hermits claim that they can lie down on a bed of nails (Figure 5.14). You
can do the same, if you want, why?

4. If the glass tube of Torricelli’s barometer is twisted instead of straight then
will it work ?

5. What is the relation among force, pressure, area?

6. What is density? What is its unit?

7. What is atmospheric pressure?

8. Is Torricelli’s vacuum a vacuum in reality? Explain

9. Establish a relation between pressure and height of a liquid.

Mathematical questions

1. Density of air is 0.0012 gm/cm’, density of gold is 19.30 gm/cm’, if 1 kg
gold is measured by a balance, what will be its real mass?

2025
2025

State of Matter and Pressure 157

2. What will be its height if kerosene is used to make a barometer instead of

mercury?
(Density of kerosene is 0.8 gm/cc)

3. Acrown of gold and an equal weight of pure
gold are hung from the two sides of a bar and
then immersed into water (Figure 5.15). If we
find that in water the weight of the crown is

less, then what will you say about the crown?
Is it pure or impure? Why?

4. Two water filled cylinders are connected
by a pipe. The cross sectional area of the two
cylinders are lcm’? and 1m? and two pistons
are attached with them. A person of weight

70 kg is sitting on the bigger piston. How
much force will you have to apply on the

smaller piston if you want to lift him? Figure: 5.15: Crown of gold and
pure gold is immersed in water

5. A weight of 10 kg is hung from a metal rod of 0.5 m length and 0.01 m? cross
sectional area. The elongated length is 0.501 m. What is the Young’s
modulus of this metal rod?

Figure: 5.16 : A man is lifted up by putting pressure on a hydraulic press
158

Multiple choice questions
P 4

Put the tick (V ) mark on the correct answer

Physics

1, What is the name of the apparatus used to measure the atmospheric pressure?

(a) Thermometer
(b) Barometer
(c) Manometer
(d) Seismometer.
2. The amount of liquid pressure is —
(a) proportional to its depth
(b) proportional to area.
(c) Inversely proportional to density
(d) equal to acceleration due to gravity.
3. What is the name of the fourth state of matter?
(a) Gas
(b) Plasma
(C) Solid
(d) Liquid.
Give answer to question no. 4 & 5
from the figure
4. How much pressure will be felt at the
bottom of the container?
(a) 98 Pa (b) 980 Pa
(c) 196 Pa (d) 1960 Pa

Figure 5.17

0.2m

5. If force F is applied on the free surface of the container, then this force-
i. will exert a pressure at the bottom of the container only.

ii. will exert a pressure on the curved surface of the vessel only.

iii. will exert a pressure in all directions of the vessel.

Which one of the below is correct?
(a) i (b) ii
(c) iii (d) i, ii, & iii

2025
2025

State of Matter and Pressure

Creative questions

Answer the following questions by

observing the figure:

(a) What is density?

(b) Explain the cause of the floatation
of the body as shown in the figure.

(c) Determine the density of the body.

(d) Explain the effect of gradual
increase of temperature of the
liquid.

2, Fahim clamped one end of a rubber
band of length L, on a wall and hung a
mass M at the other end. He saw that

159

Volume of water befor
immersion of object —,

Volume of water after

immersion of object
62 cm! ji mou
me Co
Figure 5.18

the rubber band elongated to a length L,. It regained its initial condition after
removal of the mass. He recorded the result of his experiment in a table as shown

below.

Mass (kg) 0 0.4/1

14 | 2.2 | 3 4 5

Length with
mass L(cm)| 10 12 | 15

17 | 21 | 25 | 30 | 36

Length after
removal of 10 10 | 10

mass L (cm)

10 | 10 | 10 | 10.2 | 10.6

(a) Write Hooke’s Law.
(b) How stress leads to strain?

(c) If M=2.7 kg, then L,=? Calculate it.
(d) Draw a picture of a machine which can be used daily by using the

information in the table.
