2025

Chapter Fourteen

Biotechnology

7
r
“gt

‘iy
“

ie
; ‘ sti

The Bangladesh Jute Genome Project has unraveled the mysteries of
jute life (genome sequence).

Biotechnology is an applied branch of biology. At the very beginning of 20th
century genetics developed in different ways and genetics enriched with
different information. After the discovery of genetic unit or the nature, chemical.
molecular structure of gene and regulating process of biological phenomena.
biologist should started research on how the gene can transplant from one living
cell to another. A new branch of biology named Biotechnology has been
established.

Tt has opened new horizons in solving many real problems in different branches
of science. To improve human health care, to develop advanced type of crops, to
increase the quality and amount of crops, to protect the environment, this
technology has opened up doors of immense potentials. In this chapter, we will
try to know the facts about this technology briefly.
* explain the concept and significance of biotechnology;
* explain tissue culture;
* describe the use of tissue culture in developing crops;

* explain the objectives of genetic engineering;

* describe the use of genetic engineering in producing crops;

* describe the use of genetic engineering in producing insulin and hormones;
* evaluate the efficacy of biotechnology;

* describe the use of biotechnology in curing diseases of animals:

* draw posters about the use of biotechnology and genetic engineering;

* understand the contribution of biotechnology in our everyday life.

2025
2025

14.1 Biotechnology

The word biotechnology is derived from two words biology and technology. The
word biology means special knowledge about organisms and technology means
a manner of accomplishing a task specially using technical processes, methods
or knowledge, The interrelation between biology and technology is
biotechnology. In 1919 Hungarian engineer Karl Ereky first coined the word
biotechnology. Through the application of this technology, from a cell of an
Organism, microorganism or a part of it, any new organism (plant or animal or
microorganism) with new characters is developed or any processed or by
product substance is produced from this organism.

Tn the advancement of science, biotechnology is not only a new addition. From
the dawn of human civilization, man started to apply biotechnology. Man
acquired the knowledge of fermentation and brewing about 8000 years ago. In
1863 atter the discovery of Gregor Johan Mendel’s laws of heredity in the field
of genetics, biotechnology started its new advancement, With the continuity of
the invention of double helix model of DNA by Watson and Crick in 1953,
today’s biotechnology has emerged.

Now a days, tissue culture and genetic engineering from many methods of
biotechnology are being used in multidimensional aspects in agriculture and
other fields.

14.2 Tissue culture

Due to the presence of totipotent stem in different parts of plant, it is possible to
grow exactly the same type of plant from any part of a plant. It is the principle
of tissue culture. Generally one or more than one type of a group of cell is called
tissue. This group of cells having the same origin and performing same activity
collectively,

The process of separating a tissue from a plant and allowing it to grow in a nutrient
medium is called tissue culture. Tissue culture is comparatively a new branch of
botany. In plant tissue culture, any detached part of a plant or any part (pollen
grain, terminal or lateral bud, part of root) is cultured in any nourishing and
sterilized medium. All the elements for the nutrition and growth of tissue are
supplied with the sterilized medium. The part of a plant being separated for
tissue culture is called ‘explants’,

14.2.1 Steps of tissue culture

(a) Selection of mother plant: The healthy, disease resistant plant with high
quality is selected for plant tissue culture.

(b) Preparation of culture medium: For the growth of the plant culture, culture
media are made by mixing proper amount of essential mineral nutrients,
vitamins, phytohormones, sucrose and condensing substance agar to bring
the medium to a semisolid state.

(c) Establishment of sterilized medium: Taking the culture medium in a glass
container (test tube or conical flask), its opening is usually closed with a cotton
plaque. Later in an autoclave machine, keeping it at the temperature of 121° C
under 15 Ib/sq. inch pressure for 20 minutes, the medium is sterilized. Then
again after closing the mouth or opening the glass container, it is kept in a room
with the controlling of light and temperature (2542° C) for the growth of the
explants. Aiter the turning of the medium into a cold and semisolid state,
explants are inoculated on it. In this stage, the tissue placed on the medium
through repeated cell division turns directly into a plantlet or callus or a cluster
of cells without differentiation.

poe age

lacement of model
tissue culture |) ceelgment of callus

» =-=-

Develoment of plantlets
afier transfering from callus

Plantlets

Suitable for the Development of
plantation in natural Raat
anyironment

Figure: 14.01 Consecutive steps of tissue culture

f025
(d) Transfer in root developing medium: If no root is developed in the
plantlets by this time, then after attaining a definite height, shoots are cut and
again placed in the root developing medium.

(c) Transfer to natural environment or to field level: After washing with
water and putting them outside the room on the tubs, the plantlets are allowed to
adapt with the external environment. When the grown up plantlets become fresh
and strong, they are once planted in soil in natural environment.

14.2.2 Use of tissue culture

By utilizing the tissue culture, now a days in the reproduction of plants and in
the field of developing new variety, much achievement has been obtained and new
horizons have evolved with the vast hopes. From the plant part in a short period
of time, mnumerable plantlets can be produced with the same characters. Easily
disease free and especially [free from viruses, plantlets can be produced. It can
be free from the limitation of producing plantlets in the specific season. As the
facility of producing plantlets in a short period of time in a very conspicuous
place. sufficient number of plantlets can be produced and the problem of storing
of seeds can be avoided. The attainment of plantlets of those plants which do not
reproduce by seeds and they can be speedily transferred in a short period of time
in fresh condition. Tissue culture technology is well accredited for the
production and conservation of the species about to be extinct. The plants, which
do not produce endosperm, can be developed directly by culturing their embryo.
The rapid multiplication of the plants, which do not reproduce through sexual
reproduction or of which rate of natural reproduction is low, can be done by
culturing their embryo, Tissue culture technology is being used for the
development of the plants of new characters. French scientist George Morel
(1964) proved that it is possible to obtain 40 thousand plantlets from a meristem
of the orchid plant named Cymbidium in a year. In natural way. only a limited
number of Cyhidium plantlets are produced in a year. In Thailand 50 million
plantlets, which are mostly orchids, are produced through tissue culture method
ina year. By exporting flowers, the countries like Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia
etc. eam every year crores of foreign currency. In 1952 the scientist named
Martin obtained disease free Dalia and Potato plant by culturing meristems
of them. Meristems is the growing part of the plants where such types of
undifferentiated cells are found which can produce a variety of organs or tissue
(such as branch, leave, root etc.) subject to appropriate situation.
Forma -39, Biology Class-9-10
Nowadays, it has become a regular practice to make some plants free
from viral diseases by culturing their meristems, such as potato tubers. In
Malaysia the reproduction of Oil Palm is done through tissue culture. It is
possible to obtain 44 crores of plantlets of Garland Chrysanthemum from a
vegetative part of it through tissue culture. Commercially the perfume atar is
being produced from the suspension of Jasminum using this technology in many
different countries. For the operation of heavy engine such as airplane, rocket
etc, a kind of oil from sperm whale is required. This sperm whale is gradually
becoming extinct. In an alternative way, this oil is being derived only from a
plant named jojoba but this plant does not grow anywhere except in a special
desert environment (such as, in Arizona, California), and their reproduction is
also time consuming, Through tissue culture, not only the reproduction of this
plant has become possible but also it has been changed to a level to adapt to the
climate of India.

In Bangladesh by this time much more successes have been made through tissue
culture, such as it has become possible to produce the plantlets of different
orchids grown in the country and in other countries. Disease resistant and high
yielding plantlets of banana, wood apple. jackfruit have been produced. Garland
chrysanthemum, gladiolus, lily, gerbera, garden carnation etc. flower producing
plantlets also have been produced. Planilets of different types of pulses, groundnut,
mustard, brinjal, jute have also been produced. It has become possible to produce
disease free plantlets and seed microtuber (by sowing it is possible to produce
potatoes from naturally produced 1,e smaller size than tuber) of potato applying
tissue culture. Apart from this in Bangladesh, tissue culture of various medicinal
plants (such as Ashwagandha, Sarpagandha etc.) is being done.

14.3 Genetic engineering

Genetic engineering is the technique of transferring a DNA with a specific gene
from an organism to a desired organism. In a simpler way it can be said that
changing DNA of any organism to develop new characters, is called genetic
engineering. All the techniques through which gene is being transferred is
combined called recombinant DNA technique, Following this technique the
transfer of the desired part of DNA is cut from an organism and set it intoa DNA
of another organism to develop a new character, the later DNA is called
recombinant DNA. The process of developing recombinant DNA is called DNA
technology or gene cloning,

ca
&.
S
2025

307°

With this technology, the transfer of the desired part of DNA from a bacteria to
human being, from plant to animal and from animal to plant have become
possible. The organism with the new characteristics is called GMO (Genetically
modified organism) or GE (Genetically Engineered) or transgenic.

GMO and transgenic organism are not the same. Any change that occurs in a
gene through mutation or in any other way is called genetic modification. For
thousands of years before the discovery of genetic method, man developed
genetically modified desired character by artificial selection of nature. The
process happening in nature for millions of years is called biological evolution. By
the blessings of the genetic technology, orgamic evolution occurs in a very
controlled way and in a very short time. Organism grows in this method is also
a GMO, Transgenic organism refers to those organisms where one or more than
one gene which has been taken from different types of species or varieties have
been inserted into genome.

14.3.1 Stages of the Preparation of GMO or DNA recombinant

In human dietary canal, there lives a type of bacteria called Escherichia coli.
Researching on this bacteria. most of the techniques of genetic engineering has
been developed. Genetic engineering or recombinant DNA technique is
accomplished by the steps mentioned below (Figure 14.2):

(a) DNA with the desired gene is separated from donor organism. Then plasmid
DNA1s separated from a bacteria to use it as a carrier of the gene. Plasmid 1s an
individual DNA besides the chromosome in bacteria cell, which is able to divide
or able in self-division.

(b) In this step plasmid DNA and donor DNA are divided by a special enzyme.
Desired gene is present in any of the part (location) of the donor DNA.

(c) Then donor DNA is placed in between the two terminal parts of a plasmid by
lipase enzyme. Lipase here act as adhesive. As a result DNA recombinant forms
with the specific desired gene. This recombinant plasmid now carries the desired
part of donor DNA.

(d) In this stage the bacteria recombinant DNA emerges into receiver bacteria.
The method of emergence of donor’s chopped DNA part into bacteria is called
transgenic organism. A new species of bacteria or organism created due to
transformation is called transgenic organism.

(e) In this stage bacteria with recombinant plasmid are identified and then separated.
Bacteria with desired genes are then made reproduce rapidly. Now each of these
reproduced bacteria contain the desired gene. The process by which gene is
reproduced is called gene cloning. To use the gene. plasmid 1s separated again.
Tt is noted here that genetically modified organisms (GMO) through
biotechnology possess the potential risk of exerting harmful effects on the
environment and human health. In order to assess these possible adverse effects
and successful application of biotechnologies, internationally determined
biosafety guidelines are followed throughout the world including Bangladesh.

Bb call {animal cell, plant cell,
Trolation of DNA from two fungal cell ete.)

@ eed and Donor cell,
@ culling of both DNA =
Y” resiriction enzyme.
vty WY .
ws
_7

Oe aes of both DMA with DNA ligase

development of recombinant DNA
Reeom — Desired gene
Eee =O

@ mation of recombinant DMA-plaamid
o. bacteria through transformation

Tigure 14.02: Recombinant DNA Technology

2025
2025

This technology is being significantly used by innovators or investors because in
a short period of time very accurately desired characteristics can be transferred
by transferring genes. Genetic engineering is effective for the development of
new crops in comparison with traditional ways of reproduction, because the
transfer of gene is similar or limited to the nearest species through traditional
reproduction. But it is possible to directly transfer one or more genes to nearer
or distant species through genetic engineering. Moreover. it requires a long time
to achieve desired results through the traditional way of reproduction. It is
possible to obtain plants or animals or microorganisms with desired
characteristics ina very short period of time with genetic engineering. In case of
traditional reproduction, unexpected genes may be transferred with the desired
eene and the successful transfer of the desired gene remains uncertain. In genetic
engineering, there js no possibility of transferring unexpected genes and the
chances of transferring desired gene will be much higher. Traditional
reproduction is net controlled by any rules or methods of bio-safety, but in the
case of genetic engineering it is controlled by internationally accredited rules
and methods of bio-safety, Toxicity is not tested in traditional reproduction but
is done in genetic engineering.

14.3.2 Genetic engineering in use

Genetic engineering or recombinant DNA technology is the most modern
biotechnology. The main objective of the technology is to develop organisms
with new and advanced characteristics and by which human bemgs can be
benefited. By this time, notable successes have already been achieved through
this technology.

(a) In developing crops : Insect resistant varieties of crops have been developed
by this technology. Through the entrance of the gene of Bacillus thuringiensis
bacteria, genetically modified crops like Bt corn, Bt cotton has been developed.

Tn the same way Bt rice (China} produced. Bt cotton and Bt brinjal are currently
being cultivated in Bangladesh. These crops are resistant to harmful insects under

Moth like Lepidoptera and Beetles like Coleoptera orders. Using this technology,
yirus resistant varieties of crop have been developed, for instance by transferring
ihe genes, tomato mosaic virus (ToMY), tobacco mosaic virus (IMV) and tobacco
mild green mosaic virus (TMGMV), resistant varieties of crop have been developed.
The variety of papaya that is resistant to ring spot virus (PRSV) has also been
developed, Research is being carried out for the development of late blight
resistant variety of potato by transferring late blight fungus resistant gene.
Varieties of corn and cotton tolerant to herbicides have been produced by genetic
modification.

Scientists have become able to develop herbicide tolerant tomatoes by
transferring herbicide tolerant genes into the tomato from bacteria.

This way herbicide tolerant varieties of soyabean, corn, cotton, canola etc. have
been produced.

Through genetic engineering more than one trait can be inserted into the same
plant. Nowadays, this type of transgenic plants is commercially available. For
instance, side by side both herbicide tolerant and insect-resistant characteristics
have been inserted in corm and cotton.

Through genetic change, the nutrition value of some crops has been improved.
For example, vitamin A i.e. beta-carotene gene has been transferred into rice. If
this kind of rice is taken as food then no need to take vitamin A separately.
Efforts to add iron to rice are being continued. Attempts are also made to
develop salinity and drought resistant varieties of crops through genetic
modification.

(b) In animals: In livestock. for example, transfer of the protein C gene has been
done to increase the protein in cow-milk, though this is still at research level.
Through genetic modification, genetic changes have been accomplished with
sheep by transferring the growth hormone producing gene from human beings to
it with the view of increasing tts size and meat production, To improve the
amount and quality of the sheep's fur, two bacterial genes, CysE and CysM, have
been transferred to the genomes of sheep.

(c) In improvement of fishing: Transfer of the growth hormone gene of Salmon
fish, through genetic modification, to catfish, common carp, loitta fish, nilotica
can increase the size of the fishes by near about 60 percent.

(d) In healthcare: Hepatitis b-virus vaccine interferone is being produced from
yeast through genetic modification. From genetically modified E.coli bacteria
and yeast, insulin is being commercially produced for the treatment of diabetes by
using the gene, which produces insulin in the human body. The human growth
hormone and components of the stimulant for accelerated growth of
granulocytes macrophage stimulating factor (GM-CSF) or colony are being
produced from genetically modified E.coli bacteria and yeast, and these are
bemg used for dwarlism, viral disease, cancer, AIDS etc.

(ec) For environment protection: The areas of petroleum industry and refinery
and coal mining are being made free from pollution because this technology is

2025
being used to make the environmental management easy and fast, such as
management of industrial wastes and sewage. Dr. M.K. Chakraborty, by
performing research on genetic engineering, has developed a variety of
Pseudomonas bacteria which is able to disintegrate oil and hydrocarbon in any
environment.

_ Activity: Draw a poster on the use of biotechnology and genetic engineering,
and present it to the class.

Activity: Prepare a report on the scope of biotechnology and genetic }

engineering in Bangladesh.

@)Exercise

1, How is culture medium prepared?
2. What do you mean by tissue culture?
3. Whatis explant?

4. What is genetic engineering?

5. What is transgenic?

1. Mention the roles of tissue culture in plant reproduction and developing
improved varieties of plants.

2. Discuss the roles of genetic engineering in improving crops.

1. Which one is a special enzyme to cut DNA?
a. Ligase b. Restriction
c, Lactase d. Lipase

2025
a)

ae

Biotechnology is applied to-

i. fermentation

ii, tissue culture

lll. develop transgenic organism

Which one of the following is corect?

ai & il br & i
ci & ii doi, & i

Read following stem and answer the questions 3 and 4,

4,

Imtiaz found a very good variety of woodapple visiting his friend's house. To
produce the plantlets with the same characteristics, he brought some lateral buds of
the plant, and produced them in the untversity lab of the Botany department.

. What is the process that Imtiaz followed in the lab?

a, transfer of pene b. application of hormone
c. use of enzyme d. tissue culture

Which one shows the consecutive steps of Imtiaz’s activities?

a, preparation of culture media — inoculation of explant > development of plantlets

development of roots — transfer to natural environment

b, preparation of culture media + development of plantlets + development of roots >

inoculation of explant — transfer to natural environment

c. selection of mother plant — preparation of culture media > inoculation of explant —>

development of plantlets — transfer to natural environment

d. selection of mother plant + preparation of culture media > development of

callus inoculation of explant—> transfer to natural environment

Creative questions

1.In the garden belonging to a genetic engineer Dr. Hayder, the lemon plants are dying
rapidly from disease though the lemon harvest is high. He finds that there are some
lemon trees of the same species, which live for long time although they do not produce
high yield. From these two varieties of lemon, he developed a new, high yielding
and disease resistant variety. He produced the plantlets not using a traditional process
but by a special process im his lab,

aoe

What is biotechnology?

What do you mean by GMO?

Explain the technique followed by Dr. Hayder for the development of lemon variety.
Explain the reasons fordevetoping plantlets through the special process by Dr. Hayder,

The End

2025
