2025

Chapter Two
Motion

There are many kinds of motions around us. When a person rides a cycle, it's a
kind of motion. When a car moves, that is another kind of motion. When a plane
flies, it is also a motion. When the earth revolves round the sun, it is also a
motion. When a hanging bulb oscillates, it is a kind of motion. When a bullet
ejects from a rifle, it's a motion also. Apparently it seems that all these several
types of motions are of different types. But you will be surprised and happy to
know that all these motions can be explained by a few number of quantities. In
this chapter those quantities, their units, dimensions and the relationship among
them will be discussed.
32

Physics

® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

explain rest and motion.

find out the differences among the different types of motion.

explain scalar and vector quantities.

analyse the relations among the quantities regarding motion.

explain the motion of freely falling bodies.

analyse the relations among the quantities regarding motion with the
help of graphs.

realize the effects of motion in our lives.

2025
Motion 33

2.1 Rest and Motion

When an object does not change its position with respect to time, then it
is at rest. And when an object changes it position with time, then it is in motion.

Now we need to explain the term 'position' properly. In our daily conversation
we use the word 'position' in different ways, but in physics the word '‘position'
has a definite meaning. If you are asked, what is the position of your school and
if your answer is ‘Jhiltuli', your answer is correct but the position of your school
remains unknown. If you reply, your school is 1 kilometer from the gate of your
residence; the position of your school is still unknown. Though the position of
the gate of your residence is known to us, yet we cannot tell exactly in which
direction the school is situated at a distance of 1 kilometer from the gate. But if
you say the school is situated 1 kilometer east from the gate of your residence,
only then we will know the exact position of your school. That is to know the
position of the school; we have to know both the distance and the direction
definitely. Not only this, this distance and direction has to be specified from the
position of a reference point. In the case of your school the gate of your
residence was the reference point or origin. Instead of your residence gate, the
reference point might be a bus stop or a shopping mall. Then definitely both the
position and the direction would have different values; but we can specify
certainly the position with respect to the new reference point. That is, to specify
the position of any object, it has to be mentioned with respect to a reference
point. This reference point is not an absolute one; we can conveniently choose
any point as reference point or origin.

Now the question is, to specify the position of an object, is it necessary for the
reference point or origin to be a static poimt? Let us think; in front of you a person
is sitting still on a chair. If we consider the chair as the reference point or origin,
we can firmly say, the position of your friend is not changing.

But if it happens that actually you are sitting in a moving train, what will it then be?

A man outside of the train standing on the station will say, you and your friend
are both in motion, nobody is at rest. Then whose statement is true? Your
statement or of the man standing in the station? In fact, both are correct! The
reason is- if the reference point or the origin moves at a uniform velocity, then
we cannot tell firmly whether the reference point is moving at a uniform velocity
or actually it is at rest and all other things are moving at uniform velocity in the

Forma-5, Physics, Class 9-10
34 Physics

opposite direction. Therefore, we can say, if an object changes its position with
respect to an origin, then the object is in motion with respect to that origin. It is
not our headache whether the origin is at rest or moving at uniform velocity. This
is not important since every motion is relative.

Not only this, if we want to search out an absolute rest reference point, we will
be in trouble. If we consider anything on the surface of the earth as origin, one
can object, as earth is not stationary rather it is rotating about its own axis, so
everything on its surface is also rotating. Alternatively we can say, the center of
the earth is the origin. Then someone else can come up with the objection that
the centre of the earth is not stationary, it revolves round the sun. Then we can
say more intelligently, the centre of the sun must be the origin! Then another
person can confidently say that the sun is also not stationary it is also revolving
around the centre of our galaxy. Surely you are feeling that no one can dare to
say, the centre of our galaxy is the origin! Who can say that the galaxy and the
universe are stationary? Not only this, if the centre of the galaxy is considered as
the origin to describe any position on the surface, do you realize the extent of
complexities that may arise?

In fact, we don’t need such type of complexities; for our purpose, we can
consider any point as the origin, which seems stationary to us. In this case we
have to mention all the measurements are done with respect to this origin. In this
way scientists have done all the measurements starting from the nucleus of an
atom to the satellites launched in space, with no problems what so ever!

2.2 Different Types of Motion

We see various types of motions around us, vibrations, rotations and separations
— all these are the examples of different kinds of motions. Probable motions are
unlimited, but if we wish, we can talk about some important types of motion
separately.

Linear motion

It is an example of the easiest type of motion. If anything moves along a straight
line then its motion is a called linear motion. If an object is pushed off ona
plane surface then it moves along a straight line. If a ball is allowed to fall from
a height, it will fall straight downwards, so it is also a linear motion.

2025
2025

Motion 35

Circular Motion

When a body rotates about a particular point or a line, keeping the distance of
the particles of the body unchanged, it is called circular motion. Though the
motion of electric fans, the hands of clocks etc. Are examples of circular motion,
a wonderful example of circular motion is the moon in the sky. The moon is not
tied by to the earth although it is revolving around the earth, neither is it falling
on to the earth's surface.

Translational motion

If an object moves in such a way that all the particles of the object travel the
same distance, at the same time, in the same direction then its motion is called
translational motion. Sometimes we see many examples of this type in our
surroundings. When something moves in a straight path then its example is very
common. If we do not consider the circular motion of the wheel of a car then
straight advancement of the car is an example of translational motion. At this
time every point of the car will travel the same distance, in equal time, in the

rr >

4
x 3

Not translational motion seh - Translational motion

Figure 2.01: Example of translational motion

There is no obligation that the translational motion will be straight. But the
example of translational motion is not easily available in the case of a curved
path. Figure 2.01 shows how a plane has to move for every point of the plane
travelling equal distances in the same direction. The figure also shows why the
example of translational motion on a curved path is so rare.

Periodic Motion

If the motion of a moving object passes repeatedly through a definite point in
the same direction in the same manner in a definite interval of time, then this motion
is called a periodic motion. The time interval over which this repetition occurs
is called the period of the motion. In a periodic motion, a moving particle
traverses each point in its path with the same speed after each period.
36 Physics

The vibrational motion of our heart is periodic, since it vibrates in the same
direction in the same manner after a definite interval of time. The periodic
motion may be circular (motion of the blades of a fan), hyperbolic ( orbit of
Haley's Comet around the sun) or linear ( oscillatory motion of an object hanging
from a spring).

Figure 2.02 : Example of simple harmonic motion

Simple Harmonic Motion

Simple harmonic motion is a special type of periodic motion. In case of
oscillatory motion the object oscillates on both sides ofa definite point. This
specific point is called the equilibrium point. At the extreme ends of its path, the
particle's velocity is zero. As the particle moves from one end toward the equi-
librium point, its velocity gradually increases, reaching a maximum at the equi-
librium point. As it continues toward the opposite end, its velocity decreases
gradually untilitagain becomes zero. The particle then reverses direction, moving
back in the same manner until it reaches the original end and briefly stops. This
entire process takes one period. This pattern of the motion gets repeated
There are so many examples of oscillatory motion around us. The motion of an
object hanging from a spring is an example of oscillatory motion. The
oscillatory baby on a swing (Figure 2.02) or the pendulum of a clock are the
examples of oscillatory motion. When we speak, the air molecules carry the
sound forward by this type of motion.

So far we have discussed some special types of motion but the causes of these
motions have not been mentioned anywhere. The major success of physics is
that not only can it find the causes of the different types of motion of objects but
it can also explain the motion very clearly.

Can you guess the cause of the motion?

2025
2025

Motion

2.3 Scalar and Vector quantities

37

In the world we know anything that can be
measured is called a quantity. Joy and sorrow
are not quantities but temperature is a quantity.
Because joy and sorrow cannot be assigned a
value by measuring them but temperature can
be given a value by measurement. The
temperature of your body is 37°C or 98.4°F. To
express temperature a single number is
sufficient, but there are many quantities which
cannot be expressed by a single number
completely; with its magnitude its direction has
to be mentioned or more than one magnitude
has to be mentioned so that they altogether can
express definitely the magnitude and direction

ox

Figure 2.03: Vector A and vector
B are equal in all respect although
in different position, vector C is

different from A and B, because
their magnitude is same but
direction is different. Vector D is
different from C, because
direction is same but their
magnitude is not same.

of the quantity. Position is a quantity of this
type; to express this only the distance is not
sufficient; its direction has to be mentioned
too. The quantity which can be expressed only
by a single number is called a scalar
quantity, on the other hand the quantities
for which direction has to be mentioned in addition to its magnitude are called
vector quantities.

Besides temperature examples of scalar are time, length and mass. Because they
can be expressed by a single number only. Besides position you will find the
other examples of vectors are velocity and force. You will be introduced with
velocity and force in the next chapter. Because to express these quantities,
direction is to be mentioned along with its magnitude.

To differentiate vector quantities from scalar quantities they are written in bold
font (e.g. x, y or A, B). In books or in computer printing it is easy to write
anything in bold form. But when anyone writes on a paper then to express
anything as vector, a small arrow is used over it (¥,¥ or A,B).

In this book the physics you will be taught will not involve application of
vectors. At best you will be reminded which one is scalar and which one is a
vector.
38 Physics

2.4 Distance and Displacement

We are quite familiar with the word ‘distance’ but we do not use the word
‘displacement’ in our daily life. We want to understand the relation between the
two words- distance and displacement with the help of an example. A curved
path is shown in figure 2.04. The distance travelled with respect to the point A
is denoted by the number 1, 2, 3 in kilometer.

Let us consider you are at point A (i.e.
your position is point A). Now you have
reached point B by 4 km way by
riding a bicycle along the curved path.
We can say the distance between point A
and point B is 4 km. Distance is a scalar
quantity, so to express the distance
between the points A and B we need not
mention any direction. We determined
the ‘distance’ of the point B along this
path with respect to the point A. Now if
we desire, we can determine the
‘displacement’ of point B with respect
to point A. By displacement the position
of point B with respect to point A is
meant. This can be expressed as AB as well.

In the figure the displacement is shown by a straight line from point A to point
B with an arrowhead. In this figure the magnitude of the displacement is 3 km
and the direction of the arrow is in the direction of the displacement. Therefore
displacement is a vector quantity; it has both magnitude and direction.

If going two kilometers more by a cycle you cross a six kilometer path total and
reach point C, then your displacement will be the straight line AC with an
arrow, whose magnitude is 1.5 kilometer and the direction of the arrow is along
your displacement. Though you covered more distance along the curved path
but your displacement is still small. Therefore the more distance you cover, the
more will be the displacement is not true. The difference between the initial and
final position is the displacement.

Starting from the point A, the distance towards point B is 4 km along the
curved path, similarly the distance between point B and point Ais 4 km i.e.
both are equal. But notice that the displacement from A to B and the

Figure 2.04 : Curved path trakelled by
acycle from point A.

2025
2025

Motion 39
displacement from B to A are not equal. One is negative of the other. In vector
form we can write, _, _,

AB = —-BA

Distance or displacement, both have the dimension of length.

[Displacement] = L (vector)

[Distance]= L (scalar)

2.5 Speed and Velocity

Roughly we know what is meant by velocity. The measurement of how fast a
body is moving is called the velocity. In physics, velocity has a definite
meaning and in addition to velocity we use another quantity named speed. If we
have understood the two terms distance and displacement properly, then we will
be able to understand two terms speed and velocity very easily.

Speed is the rate of change of distance with respect to time. Therefore, if you
have covered 100 m distance in 20 second, your speed will be;

(The dimension of speed [y] = LT~1 J

Velocity is the rate of change of displacement with respect to time. Therefore, if
the change of your position along a certain direction is 50 m in 20 second, then
magnitude of your velocity will be;
v= 50m = 2.5 m/s
20s
And that certain direction is the direction of velocity.
As velocity is a vector quantity, we will have to fix its direction.

(te dimension of velocity [v] = ir)

Here, one thing has to be noticed. If we consider only linear motion, then there
is no difference between velocity and speed, the magnitude of velocity is the
40 Physics

speed. To understand the internal relationship between speed and velocity, some
examples discussed:

To explain distance and displacement we considered a curved path in figure 2.04
and showed different positions in that path. To have an understanding about
speed and velocity, we can consider the same example. But now we have to tell
how much time you have taken for going from one position to another. Suppose
you have taken 20 minutes for coming from position A to B by cycle. Then your
average speed will be:

Average speed = distance travelled/time

Therefore, 4km  — 4x 1000m

’ 20 minutes 20 x 60s
Notice that, we have used the word average speed instead of the word
speed. Because, while you are riding the cycle, sometimes you rode fast and
sometimes you rode slow. So we cannot talk about the ‘instantaneous’ speed,
rather we can talk about the average speed in the time interval.

= 3.33 m/s

Let us try to determine velocity now. Like speed, we cannot calculate
instantaneous velocity. In this time interval, you rode the cycle at different
velocities. The velocity has changed due to the motion being fast or slow. Again
the velocity has changed due to the change of direction. Considering these
changes, the magnitude of the average velocity will be:

Average velocity = displacement/time
Magnitude of average velocity = Magnitude of displacement/time

3km _3x1000m

Therefore, v= =
20 minutes 20 x 60s

= 2.5 m/s

In this example you have noticed that the value of the average velocity is less
than that of the average speed. If the path was straight rather than curved, then
the magnitude of the average velocity would be equal to the magnitude of the
average speed.

2025
Motion 41

In our example, if you rode your cycle always at the same speed then we say
your speed is uniform speed. When anything moves with uniform speed then its
instantaneous speed and average speed will be the same.

Notice that, since the path is curved, if you go through this path your direction is
changing continuously. Therefore you can move with uniform speed through
this path but you cannot go with uniform velocity. If anything moves in a linear
motion along a straight line, only then uniform velocity or constant velocity is
possible.

Example

Question: Let us consider another example to understand the relation between
velocity and speed more clearly. Tie a small piece of stone with a string and
rotate it around head (figure 2.05). Does the stone move with uniform
velocity or with uniform speed? Or with uniform speed and uniform velocity?

Answer: If you think for a while you
will be able to understand that the
speed of the stone is not changing but
the velocity is changing at every
instant! Because at every instant the
direction of motion of the stone is
changing. If the stone moves along a
straight line, then the direction of its
motion will not change. Since it is
revolving, its direction of motion is
changing continuously. So it is an
example of uniform speed- not of
uniform velocity. If it is uniform

velocity, then it must be uniform
speed. Whereas for uniform speed it is not guaranteed that the velocity will be

uniform.

Figure 2.05 : Incase of rotation of a
stone tied with string, velocity might be
changed though speed is same.

Question: If the stone is suddenly released, will it move with uniform velocity
and with uniform speed?

Answer: If the stone is released suddenly, it will move straight with uniform
velocity and uniform speed. It will continue to move with uniform velocity and
uniform speed if there is no air friction or gravitational force etc.

Forma-6, Physics, Class 9-10
42 Physics

2.6 Acceleration and Deceleration or Retardation

When an object moves with uniform velocity it has no acceleration. If there is a
change of velocity, then there is an acceleration. More clearly, we can say, the
rate of change of velocity with time is acceleration.

Since velocity has both magnitude and direction, the change of velocity can
occur in two ways. In our previous example, when you rode (your bicycle along
the curved path, the change of velocity occured at every tum and you ars
accelerated. Although you travelled the whole path with uniform speed,
acceleration took place due to change of direction only. If you tied a stone with
a string, as in the previous example, and rotated it over your head with uniform
speed then the rotating stone would change its direction of motion continuously.
That is, change of velocity will occur and acceleration will takes place.

If your motion is linear, then there is no scope of changing the direction. Then
acceleration may occur only for the change of magnitude of the velocities
(speed). When the magnitude of the velocity increases, then we can say
positive acceleration is taking place along the direction of the velocity. If the
velocity decreases, then we can say negative acceleration or deceleration is taking
place. Now we can determine the acceleration of an object moving along a
straight line.

Example

Question: In figure 2.06 the change of
velocity of an object with time is
shown. Identify where there is
acceleration and where it is absent.

Answer: There is acceleration at A; at
B there is no acceleration. At C, there is
acceleration; at D there is negative —T_ Fo
acceleration or deceleration. time

Figure 2.06: Change of velocity of an
object with time

2025
2025

Motion 43

In this chapter we will discuss only the linear motion i.e. if the change in
magnitude of the velocity occurs then only acceleration will takes place.

Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity with time. If the acceleration is
uniform i.e. it will not change with time, then we can write;

(final velocity-initial velocity)

acceleration = -
time

If the velocity of an object ata certain time is u and after time t the velocity
becomes v, then the acceleration a will be;

v-U
a=
t

The dimension of acceleration: [a] = LT~?

Unit of acceleration: ms~*

When the acceleration a is known and if the initial velocity is u then after time ¢
it is very easy to find the final velocity v (Figure 2.07). The final velocity is,

v=urtat

If the object starts its motion with an

velocity

acceleration from rest, then
v=at

In the meantime all the discussions done I
so for are true for uniform acceleration. time
If the object does not move with uniform
acceleration, then it is not so easy to
find the acceleration from the initial
and final velocities.

Figure 2.07 : Increasing velocity of an
object which is moving with uniform
acceleration, started from rest.

The examples of motion we see around us, such as the motion of a car, train or a
bicycle etc. have their accelerations as non-uniform almost all the time. For
example, if a car starts its motion from rest and increases its velocity gradually,
then starting from zero its acceleration reaches a particular value. When the car
attains its peak velocity, then its velocity does not increase any further and
theacceleration becomes zero again. If the car reduces its velocity and ceases it
A4 Physics

motion, then retardation starts. If the car ceases its motion, then both its velocity
and acceleration become zero. You may think that the examples of uniform
acceleration are rare.

There is an amazing example of uniform acceleration which we see in our
surroundings. That is the acceleration due to gravity. Near the earth’s surface, the
value of this acceleration is 9.8 ms”. If we release an object from rest from above the
earth, then its velocity increases according to the equation v = gt.

2.7 Equations of Motion

Since we discuss only linear motion, the quantities we have talked about so far
are:

u: initial velocity

a: acceleration

t: elapsed time

v: velocity after elapsed time

s: distance covered in elapsed timed

Almost all the relationship among these quantities, are done already, only one is
left, which is the relationship for the distances. If an object has no acceleration,
then there is no change in its velocity. Then the initial velocity and the final
velocity will be equal i.e.(u = v). Therefore the distance covered will be,

s=vt
If there is uniform acceleration, the final velocity is:

v=urtat

This equation shows that the velocity is changing with time. The entire
duration is divided into many tiny equal intervals, the distance covered in each
small interval will not be the same. This is because the particle's velocity chang-
es constantly due to acceleration. However, to calculate the total distance trav-
eled, these varying distances must be summed. Calculus, a specialized branch of
mathematics, is used to perform such calculations. However, if the particle's
acceleration is uniform, it is possible to determine the total distance traveled
without using calculus

2025
2025

Motion

45

Science the velocity is changing every moment hence we cannot write the

equation s = vt but if we consider an average velocity V then we can write

s=Vt
In the case of a uniformly accelerated
particle, the average velocity over a < pee
specific time interval is equal to the veloc- >
ity at the midpoint of that interval. 2 v
u
_utv_ ut(turat)
~ 2 2 0 v2 t
time (s)

1
V=ut+-zat

2 Figure 2.08: Average velocity is the
mid time velocity of the initial and

final velocity.
Therefore the travelled distance is,
s=Vt
s= (u + 5a) t
2

= ut + at?
s=u 2%

In all the equations of motion we have already deduced the time f is present. We

can deduce another equation in which ¢ is absent.
Such as:

v=utat

1
v*=(u+ atP= wu? + 2uat + a?t? =u? + 2a (ut + sat?)

[ v* = u* + 2as

46 Physics

Although this equation looks like another general equation, there is some amazing
physics hidden in it, which we will reveal in the fourth chapter.

Example

Question: The velocity of a car is increased by 60 km/hour within 1 minute of
starting from rest. What is its acceleration?

Answer: From now we will use the unit of time in second (s) instead of minute
or hour and for distance meter (m) will be used instead of mile or kilometer.

The final velocity of the car is

km 60x 1000 m

hour 60x60s = 16:67 m/s

vp = 60

So the problem is like this, a car attains a velocity of 16.67 m/s in 60 s starting
from rest, what is its acceleration?

v=at
v 16.67 m/s a
a= = 278 m/s

Question: A car is moving with a velocity of 60 mile/hour, suddenly its engine
stops. It takes 5 minutes to come at rest. What is the deceleration of the car?

Answer: When there is acceleration, velocity increases; where as velocity
decrease of when there is negative acceleration or deceleration.

Again we will use s for time and m for distance.

1 mile = 1.6km = 1600 m
Initial velocity of car,

~ 60 miles _ 60x 1.6 x 1000m
a hour — 60 x 60s

= 26.8 m/s

Final velocity of car, v= 0

2025
2025

Motion 47

Acceleration,

v—-u_ 0-26.8m/s
t 3008s

a= = —0.089 m/s*

Thus the acceleration of the car —0.089 m/s? or deceleration 0.089 m/s?

Question: The velocity of a bullet is 1.5 km/s. It has penetrated 10 cm of a wall.

What is the deceleration of the bullet?
Answer: The only way to solve this problem is to use the formula

v* = u* — 2as
Final velocity, v = 0

10
0 = (1.5 x 1000)? — 2a (<0)

> 100
1.5 x 1000
= weeny = 11,250,000 m/s?

Deceleration: 11,250,000 m/s? (or acceleration: —11,250,000 m/s?)

2.8 Laws of Falling Bodies

We have already mentioned that an amazing example of uniform acceleration is
acceleration due to gravity g. Due to its effect an object falls downward when it
is released from above the earth surface. Observing these types of falling bodies
Galileo invented three laws. The laws can be used in case of bodies falling
freely. The laws are as follows:

( First law: All bodies falling from rest and from the same height without any )
resistance traverse equal distance in the same time.

Second law: The velocity (v), acquired by a freely falling body from rest in
a given time (A) is directly proportional to that time. i.e.v « t

Third law: The distance (A) traversed by a freely falling body from rest in a
given time (A) is directly proportional to the square of the given time. i.e.

2
hot yy,

48 Physics

We have mentioned earlier that the acceleration due to gravity is an example of
uniform acceleration. The equations we have deduced about motion, can be used
to deduce the equations of motion of the falling bodies. In case motion s was used
to indicate the travelled distance, for a falling body we will use h to indicate height.
For acceleration we will use g instead of a. These two will be the only difference!

v=ut gt
1

h=utt+5gt?

v2? =u2+2gh

The three laws of falling bodies of Galileo are nothing but these equations of
motion of falling bodies.

The first law states that all objects released from the same height will reach the
ground at the same time i.e. it does not depend on the mass of the objects. This
does not go with the experience of our daily lives. If a piece of paper and a piece
of stone are released from the same height, at the same time, then the stone reaches
the ground first and the paper reaches the ground later. This happens due to the
resistance of air. If the experiment is done in a vacuum tube then both the paper
and stone will reach the ground at the same time. Galileo's first law can be
understood from the equation of falling bodies. This is because there is no mass of
object in the equations of velocity and traversed height. That is the acceleration
due to gravity acts equally on both heavy and light objects. So the freely falling
body traverses equal distances in the same time.

The second law of Galileo is the law of increase of velocity due to g. If the initial
velocity u is zero then velocity v is proportional to g. Galileo's third law is nothing
except the equation of h. In this formula ifwe consider u=0 then we see that
traversed distance / is proportional to t?

Example

Queston: A good pace bowler of cricket can throw a ball with a velocity of
150km/hour. If he throws the ball vertically upwards, how high will it go?

2025
Motion 49

Answer:

150 x 1000 m

150 km/hour = 60 X60s

= 41.67 m/s

Acceleration due to gravity will act as retardation when the ball is thrown
vertically upwards. The ball eventually comes to a stop. If the height is
expressed by / then,

v2? =u*—2gh
v=0, u= 41.67 m/s, g = 98m/s?
u2 (41.67)?
Therefi = — = —— _ m=88.
erefore, h 2g 2X98 m = 88.59 m

[The ball will approximately reach the roof of a 30 storied building]

Question: When a space ship revolves round the earth then its speed is very
high and is nearly 10 km/s. If a cannon ball is fired at this velocity straight upward,
how high will it go?

Answer: Let us try like with the cricket ball, only the initial velocity will be
10,000 m/s instead of 41.67 m/s.

10,000)?
Therefore, h= Ot on = 5,102,000 m = 5,102 km

Though it is felt that there is no mistake anywhere but actually the answer is not
correct. This is because we have considered the value of acceleration due to
gravity is 9.8 m/s’, this is true for the distances near the surface of earth. But if
we go far from the earth the value of g will decrease. When we deduced the
equation

v? =u? —2gh

then we considered that the value of g is not changing. It is not true for this
problem. So what we have learned till now, that knowledge cannot be used to
solve this problem. If we cannot solve it, there will be no loss; because if
anything is thrown upwards with this high velocity it will be burnt due to air
friction!

Forma-7, Physics, Class 9-10
50 Physics

@) Do yourself
(— >

Determination of velocity and acceleration at any time from a time-
distance graph.

(Motion and Graph)
We have deduced equations of motion in the previous sections. We have
analyzed the relations between distance travelled, velocity and
acceleration. In this section we will analyze the same quantities but only by
graph. We can have a kind of real feelings about different quantities of
motion, if we analyze them graphically.

Table 2:01
Time(s) Distance (m) Time(s) | Distance (m)
0 0 0 0
1 1 2 6
2 4 4 24
3 9 6 54
4 16 8 96
5 25 10 150

We need to mention something here. Whenever we have discussed distanc-
es travelled, velocity or acceleration we always considered a
standard situation. We considered that when an object moves, there is no
friction and the object does not lose its energy by any other means. That
does not happen in real life. That is why it is not so easy to collect real data
for distances travelled, velocity or acceleration. For performing a real
experiment an air track is used in the laboratory, where an object is kept
floating in an air layer so that no friction is present. To measure the change
of position of an object with respect to time, electric sparks or electronic
signals are used. We will not get such type of data in our daily lives easily.
For now we will consider that we have collected some data in this standard
\ situation, to use in our graph. Two sets of data have been shown in the table /

2025
2025

Motion 51

2.01 which represents the change of position of an object with respect to
time. We will solve the first set for you and you will solve the second one by
yourself.

Figure 2.09: Finding velocity - time from distance - time and
acceleration - time from velocity-time graphs are drawn.

The distance — time graph of the first data set of the table is shown in figure
\2.09. We have taken data in integer form. From the graph we will be able to)

52 Physics

(Sind the distance of any time from 0 to 5s. For example the distance of the \
object in 2.5 second is approximately 6.25m. If we have a velocity versus
time graph, from there we can find the velocity easily. Velocity of an object
is the rate of change of its position. So we can see from the graph the object
has travelled a distance of 0 m to 1 min 0 to 1 second. Therefore the average
velocity at this time,

_G@-0)m
us 1s

We can use this average velocity for the mid-time value of 0 to 1s. Similarly
the average velocity within 1 to 2s is,

=1m/s

We can use this velocity as data for the time 1.5 s within 1 to 2s. Similarly
we see the average velocity between 2 s and 3 s is 5 m/s, between 3 and 4 s
is 7 m/s and between 4 s and 5 s is 9 m/s. We see these data points are on a
straight line on a graph paper and we can connect the points by drawing a
straight line. Although we have put the data for time 0.5, 1.5, 2.5, 3.5 and 4.5
s, but we can find the velocity at any time after drawing a straight line
through these points. For example at time 3 s the velocity is 6 m/s.

We will be able to find the acceleration in the same way after drawing the
velocity -time graph of figure 2.09. Acceleration is the rate of change of
velocity. Since the velocity- time graph is a straight line, so in this case we
will get the same value of the acceleration at any point on the graph. For
example the rate of change of velocity in between the time 2 s to 3 s is,

(6— 4) m/s
a= “Bray 2s

For any other time if we calculate the acceleration, the same value will be
found. It is shown in the acceleration- time graph in figure 2.09.

Ne w,

2025
2025

Motion 53

Therefore, you have seen that we have found velocity or acceleration
at any time starting from the distance- time graph. To more accurately
we draw this graph, the more precisely we calculate those quantities.
Now, use the second set to calculate velocity and acceleration from

graph.

Q) Investigation 2.01

Determination of the average speed of an object rolling over a slanting
plank.

Objective: To determine the speed for the same distance travelled on
different slopes and then to find relation with slope with the help of graph.
Apparatus:

1. A plane plank or bench or table.

2. Aruler or meter scale.

3. Amarble or a cylindrical pen or a pencil which can roll.

Figure 2.10: A marble is allowed to roll on an inclined plane.
54 Physics

/ Procedure:

1, Taking a plank or a bench or a table, measure its length (L) by a ruler or
meter scale. This distance will be the distance travelled by the object.

2. By placing a book under one end of the plane plank or bench or table let
us make it inclined. Measure the height (h) of that end Dividing height
by length, find the slope (sin@ = h/L ).

3. Put a marble or a pencil or a pen on the inclined plane and make sure
that it can roll.

4. You have to measure the time taken by the marble to travel the length of
the inclined plane. A stop watch is needed to measure the time accurately.
But it is unlikely to have a stop watch available. (Now a days stop watch
option is available in many mobile phones. You use the method given
below). If you have a normal watch instead of a stop watch, you will be at
a disadvantage. Because normal watch cannot measure less than a second.
We need to measure more accurately. If we have no stop watch, we can try
to measure the time by other means. How many numbers (one, two,
three,.....) can you count in fifteen seconds at normal speed?

Let us consider if you count up to forty five in fifteen seconds, then we can
assume to utter every number in approximately 1545 = 1/3 second.

Let the marble or pencil or pen move on the inclined plane and start
counting one, two, three and so on. Up to which number could you count
for the the marble, pencil or pen to reach the lower end of the inclined
plane. Calculate the actual time by multiplying with the approximate
multiple.

5. Repeat the experiment several times and calculate the average time.

6. Calculate the speed, dividing the length of inclined plane by the average
time. This is average speed.

7. Increase the slope of the inclined plane by placing another book.
Measure the new height after placing the second book. Calculate the slope

\ for this height. yy,

2025
2025

Motion 55

(8. . Let the marble, pencil or pen roll on the inclined plane again. Measure \
the time by counting the numbers and calculate the speed again. Increase
the slope gradually and calculate the average speed every time.

9. Draw a graph by plotting sin@ along the X-axis and average speed along
Y-axis. From the graph calculate the speed for any slope.

No. of Distance L| Height h |sin® = |Time t speed = Se Sond
Readings) om cm h/L s m/s Time m/s
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3

Discussion: Describe the relation between slope and speed?
Discuss what necessary measures should be taken to perform the experiment
with more accuracy?

Investigation 2.02

(Playing with different kinds of motion. )
Objective: To find the differences among different kinds of motion
through games.

Requirement : Small open space.

Procedure:

1. You have to select definite activities to explain different kinds of
motion.

Linear motion: You have to run straight, if you face any obstructions
you have to turn back and go straight again.

Rotational motion: Spreading your hands on two sides starts rotating |

56 Physics

(— Translatory motion: Looking in a particular direction move back and\\
forth and left and right.

Periodic motion: You have to run along a circular path and repeat

several times.

Oscillatory motion: Raise your hands and oscillate them left and right.

2. Those who are interested in playing this game will stand scattered
around the room.

3. An instructor will loudly say the words linear, rotational, translatory,
periodic or oscillatory motion.

4. Everyone has to perform the activities of the game as instructed by the
instructor. Those who will fail to follow the instructions will be
knocked out.

5. The instructor of the game will utter different motions at different

times and the boys and girls have to act out that motion.

The person who will be able to demonstrate all kinds of motion perfectly,

he or she will be declared the winner.

Keeping the fundamental characteristics of the motions unchanged, the

activities of different motions can be changed as necessary. For example,

the instructions may be given to demonstrate two different motions at the
same time. In case of linear and oscillatory motion the participant have to
run straight by oscillating his or her hands left and right.

Discussion: Write down some addtional names of different motions
\ which can be demonstrated. /)

Investigation 2.03

(rT

o determine the speed of moving vehicles. +)
Objective: Determination of speed of different kinds of vehicles by
measuring the distances travelled at different times.

Apparatus: Ruler.

Working Procedure:

1. To determine the speed of a vehicle, at first you have to measure the
distance between two stationary objects beside a road (e.g. light post, Tree,
shop etc). Measurement of distance very accurately may be complex that’s
why we will use a simple way to do it. At first you have to measure the
distance of your step by a ruler. (Measure the distance of ten steps and
\ divide it by ten to make it accurate). y,

2025
Motion 57

(9, Now walk from one stationary object to another object on road sides)
Count the number of steps you need to travel the distance and
multiply it by the distance of your single step to calculate the distance. It
will be better if the distance is approximately hundred meters.

3. Now try to measure the speed of a bicycle, rickshaw, tempo or a
pedestrian staying at a safe distance beside the road. Since the distance is
known, you can measure the required time, then speed can be calculated.

4. To measure the time accurately a stop watch is required, or an ordinary
watch will meet up the purpose instead of a stop watch. If you have none,
you can use an easy method to measure the time. It takes almost one

second to utter the words “one thousand one”, “one thousand two”, “one
thousand three” etc. Counting like this we can measure it.

5. When you will see a cycle, rickshaw, tempo or a pedestrian just passing
the first stationary object, you start to count time with a watch, or start
counting “one thousand one”, “one thousand two” and so on. Again when
you will see this vehicle just passing the second stationary object, you
see the time on the watch or stop counting the numbers. Find the required
time from the watch or up to which number of words you have counted,

This is the time to travel the distance.
Calculate the speed dividing the distance by the time.
Discussion: Compose your procedure of measuring time with the time of

a watch and see how accurate is it. Guess the percentage of error of your
calculated speed considering the degree of accuracy of your step

measuring procedure.

Distanced j A d=
Vehicles No. of steps travelled Time verage spec

L (m) t (s) L/t (m/s)

Ne y,

Forma-8, Physics, Class 9-10

58 Physics

(?) Exercise
General questions

1. Velocity is zero but acceleration is not zero—is it possible? If possible,

explain.

2. Velocity is changing but speed is not changing. Is it possible? If possible show
it.

3. The acceleration due to gravity on the moon is 6 times less than that of earth.
Ifa stone is released from a definite height towards earth, at which velocity it
will hit the ground, if the same stone is released from the same height.

4.Is there any place from where you gol km south and then 1 km east,
continuing 1 km north will you reach the same place?

5. Do we travel double the distance at double the time in case of uniform
acceleration?

& Mathematical question

1. From your school a car has gone 40 km east, then 40 km north, then 30 km
west, then 30 km south, then 20 km east, then 20 km north, then 10 km west,
then 10km south. In which direction and how far is the car from your
school?

2. Show when velocity and acceleration become positive, negative or zero on
the portions OA, AB, BC and CD in figure 2.11.

3. If position is plotted along the Y- axis instead of velocity then what would be
the value of velocity and acceleration on the portions OA, AB, BC and CD
in the figure 2.11.

4. The velocity of a caris 30 km/hour, after 1 minute the velocity of the car
becomes 50 km/hour with uniform acceleration. What is the distance
travelled by the car in this time?

5. You have thrown a ball vertically upwards at 10 m/s. How much height will it
attain in what time?

2025
2025

Motion 59

OX) Multiple choice questions

Put the tick (Vv ) mark on the correct answer

1. What is the unit of acceleration?
a)ms!' b) ms?
c)NS_ d)kgs”

2. What type of motion do the hands of a

velocity
>

clock have? a ——.
a) linear motion __ b) elliptical motion time
C) periodic motion d) vibratory motion Figure 2.11

3. The distance traveled in a given time by a freely falling body from rest will be

a) proportional to the time

b) proportional to the square of that time

c) Inversely proportional to that time

d) proportional to the square root of that time

4. Abody moves with a uniform acceleration starting from rest. What will be the
distance travelled by the body at a given time?

: _ Gutv)
(i) s= —t
(ii) s = ut+ Sat?
(iii) s = ut + 2at?
5. Which of the following is the correct?
a)i b) ii C) ii & iii d) ‘i & ii
5. Which of the velocity-time graph below represents the graph of a freely
falling body?

velocity
velocity
velocity
velocity

0 time 0 time 0 time 0 time

Figure 2.12
60 Physics

Creative question

1. Rajib with his family members started for Jaflong in Sylhet by
microbus.He recorded the magnitude of the velocity i.e. speed of the car from
the speedometer after every Smins throughout the journey. The magnitude of
velocity he got per hour was 18,36,54,54,54,36, and 18 kilometer.

(a) What is instantaneous speed?

(b) Explain the acceleration of an object moving with uniform velocity.
(c) Find the distance traveled by the car in the first 5min.

(d) Draw and explain the velocity-time graph from the collected data.

2. An object of mass m is moving with an acceleration a. Its initial velocity is uw,
final velocity v and the distance travelled in time t is s. The state of motion of the
object is given in the table:

No. of event) u (m/s) V (m/s) t (s) s (m) a (m/s?)
1 10 30 5 - -
2 5 20 4 44 3

(a) Define acceleration.

(b) Why is the acceleration due to gravity the example of uniform acceleration?
(c) Calculate the value of s for event no.1 in the table.

(d) Comment on event two through mathematical analytical perspective.

2025
