Chapter One

Geography and Environment

The earth is the planet where we live. We live in different regions with
distinctive natural environments. Naturally, our lifestyles, societies, cultural,
economic and political activities have unique characteristics, All these things are
the topic of discussion in modem geography. So, geography is a science of
nature and it is a science of environment and society. In this chapter we are going
to deal with geography and environment, their scope, different branches of
geography and the importance of geography as a subject.

A parts of Solar System A natural scenery
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-

* explain the idea of geography and environment;

* describe the scope of geography;

¢ explain the importance of studying geography and environment;

® explain the inter-relationship among different elements of geography and

environment.

Forma-!, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
2 Geography and Environment

Concept of Geography

We live in the earth and it is our inhabitat. As human habitat the description of
the earth is Geography. The word geography is derived from two Greek words
‘geo’ (earth) and ‘graphy’ (description). But the discipline does not simply
describe the earth, it explores the planet as people, habitats. Eratosthenes was the
first Greek scholar who used the term ‘geography’ as the study of earth as human
habitat. British Geographer Professor L.A Macnee said, 'geography is the study
of environment of man both physical and social, particularly in its relation to
human activities.’ British Geographer L. Dudley Stamp has defined geography
as, 'A description of the world and of its inhabitants.’ German Geographer
Professor Carl Ritter said that geography is concerned with the objects on the
earth's surface around man. Geography is the science of nature, environment and
social science. According to renowned American Geographer Prof. Richard
Hartshorne, ‘geography provides accurate, orderly and rational description and
interpretation of the variable character of the earth's surface.’

On the one hand Geography is natural science, on the other hand it is
environment and social science. The main discussion topic of Geography is especial
knowledge on nature, environment and society, Academy of Science of Washington
D.C. gave a definition of Geography in 1965. According to them, Geography
searches for how the sub-management of natural environment of the surface and
how human beings adjust themselves with these natural phenomena or physical
body.

People live in this world and lead their life on it. The natural environment influences
their way of living. Climate, physical features, natural vegetation, animals, rivers,
seas, and mineral resources which influence the life of the people in different ways.
Activities of man change the environment, such as, their homes, roads, ports and
cities change the nature and environment im different ways. Settlement is built by
cutting trees, by filling up canals, wetlands, and ponds. There is interaction between
man and environment.

The main function of geography ts to find out the cause of interaction between
man and environment.

Scope of geography

Science and technological expansion, new inventions, innovations, expressions of
thoughts, change of social values have extended the scope of geography. So, various
subjects such as Geomorphology, Climatology. Oceanography, Soil Science, Botany,
Sociology, Economics, Politics and History etc. have been included in Geography,

2025
2025

Geography and Environment

Branches of geography
| Branches of Geography |
|

| Physical Geography |

¥.

| Hunan Geography |

¥

* ‘ '
| Biogeography| | Climatology | Eeonomic Population Political
Geography Geography Geography
[Geomorphology] | Soil Geography | Oceanography | | Zoo Geography |
¥" i a ¥ ¥
Regional Social Quantitative Transport Urban
Geography Geography Geography Geography Geography

¥ ¥.
| Disaster Managment | | Medical Geography | | Geographical Information System |

(a) Physical Geography : Physical Geography is that branch of Gerography dealing
with the natural features of the earth, the home of human beings. Physical
Geography deals with water, air, animals, and the land of the planet earth ie.
everything that is part of the four spheres-the atmosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere
and lithosphere.

1. Geomorphology :Geomorphologists study the landforms of the planet, from
their development to their disappearance through erosion and other proceses.

2. Climatology : Climate geographers investigate the distribution of long term
weather patterns and activities of the earth’s atmosphere.

3. Biogeography : Biogeography studies the distribution of plants and animals on or
near the surface of the earth.

4. Soil geography : Soil geographers study the upper layer of the lithosphere, the
soil of the earth and its categorization and patterns of distribution.

5. Oceanography : About three fourth of the earth is water. Oceanography
discusses the transport and communication among continents through ocean, the
rise and fall of ocean surface and the management of ocean resources.

(b) Human geography: Human geography is a major branch of geography that

studies people and their interaction with the earth and with their organization of

space on the earth's surface.
4 Geography and Environment

1. Economic geography : Economic geography examines the distribution of

production of goods, the distribution of wealth and the spatial structure of economic
condition.

2. Population geography : Population geographers are concerned with the
distributions, migrations and growth of population in geographic areas.

3. Regional geography: Regional geographers focus on areas as large as continents
or as small as an urban area.

4. Political geography: Political geography investigates all aspects of boundaries,
country, state and national development, international organizations. diplomacy,
intemal country sub divisions, voting and more.

5. Quantitative geography : Quantitative geography uses quantitative techniques
and models to test hypothesis. Quantitative methods are often used in many other
branches of Gerography but some geographers specialize in quantitative methods only.
6. Transport geography : Transport peographers study both public and private
transport networks and the use of those networks for transporting people and goods.
7. Urban geography : Urban geography deals with the ongin, evolution,
classifications, environment, and different areas of cities and towns.

8. Disaster management : Disaster management focuses on how to reduce loss
during disaster and how to protect environment and ocean from disaster.

Whatever branch we discuss, environment is always an issue. Al present Geography
and Environment are taught in integrated way. Natural and social environment
bear equal importance in geographical science.

Concept of environment

People live in an environment. An environment is made up of rivers, oceans,
mountains, forests, settlements, roads. plants, animals. water, soil and air, All activities
of human beings have profound effect on natural and man-made features of the
environment. Environmental scientist Arms said, ‘environment is the surrounding
organic and natural situations of animals.”

C.C. Park says. environment means the sum of all the situations of humans at certain
point of place and time.

Environment changes with the change of time and place. For example, at the
beginning of mankind, water, air, plants and animals made up the environment.
Later, human interference, social, economic, cultural and political activities
developed anew environment i.e. human environment.

2025
2025

Geography and Environment 5

Elements of environment ; Environment is made of two kinds of elements - living
and non liying elements. Those who have life, take food, have mtelhigence, have
birth/death and growth are living things/elements. Trees, birds and animals, insects,
humans and other animals are living things. These are the living elements of
environment, Earth, water. air, mountams, rivers, seas, light, temperature, moisture
are the non living things/elernents. They make non living environment.

Task : Make inter-relationship among different elements of environment.

Types of environment : There are two types of environment--natural environment and

social environment, Earth, water, air, mountains, rivers, seas, light, trees, birds, animals

and insects, constitute natural environment. On the other hand human behaviours,

rituals, education, values, economics and politics constitute social environment.

Importance of studying geography and environment

The disciplines deal with :

* The envitonment of the world, the nature of a particular place. the origin and
structure of particular landforms i.e, hills, mountains, river, sea, plains and deserts.

*® Origin and evolution of the earth along with the evolution of plants and animals.

* Plants and animals of different environments—their behaviours, food habits,
and their habitats,

* How social environment has changed due to the development of agriculture,
industry, trade and commerce, transport and communication.

« How natural calamities occur, how to contral them and what harm they do to the
human beings.

* How human interference spoils the environment-- the intensity of the damage,
the cause of the rise of temperature and the greenhouse effect as well as their
influence on the environment and how to mininiuze the loss,

« How to develop human resources for economic development by utilizing
natural resources.

e Ocean and the management of its resources.
Exercise

Multiple choice questions
1. Which of the following belongs to Biogeography?

a. Running business b. Plants and animals

c. Latitude and longitude d. Evolution of towns
6 Geography and Environment

2. The topic of discussion in Geography is —
i. nature.

ii, power,

lil. society.

Which one of the following is correct?

a iand il b. iand ii

¢.  iiand ili d. i. ii and iit
Answer the questions 3 and 4 from the following stem :

Mr. Nayeem has established a shop on the side of a cross road filling up a lowland and.
built a house just behind the shop as well.

3. WNayeem's work belongs to which branch of geography?

a. Biogeography b. Hitman geography

ec. Climatology d. Geomorphology
4. The above activity is —

i. the evolution of village.

ii, urbanization,

ni. developing locality.

Which one of the following is correct?

a tand ii b. iand iii

c. tand iii d. i, ii and ill
Creative questions
1.

Group A Group B

Hills and mountains Biogeography

Humans Physical geography

Climate Human geography

Plants and trees Economic geography
a. Who has for the first time used the term “Geography'?
b. What is the subject matter of Oceanography?
ec. Which environment does include the elements of group ‘A’? Explain it.
d. Analyze the influence of group ‘A’ and “B’ in human life.

2025
