Chapter One
Introduction to Economics

From cradle to grave, human beings continually struggle with financial
problems for their survival. Throughout their lives, they try to overcome various
obstacles. The subject economics helps them in numerous ways to overcome
these problems or obstacles. Economics plays a very significant role in
achieving human, social and national development. So to learn about this
subject is very important. This chapter discusses briefly the origin and
development of economics, the major economic problems, the definition and
principles of economies, the circular flow of income and the different economic
systems.

Y hh i " : as
After studying this chapter, we will be able to-

describe chronologically the origin and development of economics;
explain the mutual relationship between scarcity and unlimited want;
describe the concept of economics;

describe the ten main principles of economics;

introduce the various economic systems and

evaluate the comparative advantages and disadvantages of different
economic systems.

Forma-!, Economics Class 9-10
2 Economics

1.1 The Origin and Development of Economics

The economics that we study today was not so complex in earlier times. The way of
living of human being was much simpler in ancient or premitive socicties. Food,
clothing and habitation—these were the basic needs of people. The practice of
exchanging goods was very limited. Basically, physical labour was the only means
of production. There were no class-divisions among people in society. They were
united into a body with no feeling of defeat or victory to them; it was the main
pinciple of premitive society. Production and consumption were the main aim
of that society. During the time of the prophet Moses (a:), in 2500 BC in
Hebrew Civilization, there had been some simple discussions about economics
in religious and philosophy books. Law, religion, morality, philosophy and
economics were all discussed together at that time. There was no existence of
economics as a separate discipline. Knowing about production, consumption
and running the day-to-day family life was then called economics.

The English word ‘economics’ has been derived from the Greek word
‘oikonomia’. Oikonomia means the management of the household. Plato
(427 —347 BC) and Aristotle (384 — 322 BC) were the two great thinkers of the
Greek Civilization. They have discussed various fundamental topics of
economics, including individual property, the wages of the labourers, slavery
system and interest.

In ancient India in the 4th BC, Koutillya’s (Chanakya) ‘Arthashastra’ (Treatise on
Economy) focused elaborately on the issues of politics, society, economics and
military affairs of the whole country. From the last part of the 16th century tll
the last part of the 18th century, the expansion that occurred in the international
trade in England, France and Italy has been termed as Mercantilism. For
increasing the wealth of the country, the power of the state and making the
surplus in its trade, the merchants of England exported more and imported less.
Goods produced in England were exported to different countries of the world in
huge quantities and valuable minerals (gold, silver, diamond, etc.) were

2023
2025

Introduction to Economics 3

imported. By the middle of the 18th century, the French took a stance against the
luxurious lifestyle of the rich people of their country, excessive taxation and the
metcantilism of England, and propagated the tenets of Physiocracy. According
io the physiocrats only agriculiure, including mining and pisciculture, was the
productive sector. On the other hand, industry and trade were considered
non-productive sectors.

In this way, during the ancient and the Middle Ages discussions about
economics had been gradually becoming complicated. However, economics
received the recognition as a separate discipline when the British economist
Adam Sraith wrote his farnous book, “An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of
the Wealth of Nations’ in 1776. This book by Adam Smith is the basis of
modern economics.

Task: Write chronologically about the origin and development of economics.

1.2 Two Major Economic Problems: Scarcity and Unlimited Wants

Human beings cannot get everything they desire, This is known as want. There
is no end to this need in life, For example, you are a student. Suppose you have
one thousand taka, You need a shirt, a pair of pants and a pair of good shoes, In
this way you will find that you need many more things. But you have only one
thousand taka, Compared to your needs, the amount of money is very little, In
economics, this is known as ‘scarcity of resources’. Because of scarcity, a person
chooses or selects things according to their importance. If there had been no
need to choose, there would have been no need for this discipline, economics.

Scarcity and Unlimited Wants

The main problem of humans is not to be able to get everything according to
their wants. To produce any goods (e.g. books) or services (e.g. medical
services), resources are necessary. But “wealth is limited.’ Thus it is possible to
get limited goods by means of the limited wealth. Therefore, with limited wealth
all the necessities in life cannot be fulfilled. This is indeed the reason of scarcity.
4 Economics

Scarcity would have not been created if there had been lesser needs. Famous
economist Professor L. Robins says, “Economics is a science that analyses
human behavior related to the combination of unlimited wants and alternatively
usable scarce resources.” According to economist Samuelson, since resources
are scarce, the question of the best utilization of the resources in society holds
such importance. The want for resources obtained from nature like sunlight or
the wind is very high. But we do not have to spend any money to get these.
Usually there is no scarcity of these resources. Since the wants of humans are
too many and the resources are limited, all their wants cannot be satisfied.
Amongst mumerous wants, human beings satisfy only a few, And they fulfil
these wants judging the importance of these wants. Humans satisfy the most

necessary wants on a priority basis, This is known as selection of wants.

1.3 Concept of Economics

With the development of knowledge and science, the sphere of economics has
grown as well to a great extent. As a combination of the knowledge of
economics from both the past and the present, economics as a discipline is now
much developed or enriched. Among those who have presented economics as a
subject or discipline, Adam Smith, David Ricardo and John Stuart Mill think of
economics as a science of production and distribution of wealth. Of them Adam
Smith is regarded as the father of economics. This trend of economics is known
as classical economics. Back then the name of economics was Political
Economy. Classical economists believed in the doctrine/theory/ principle named
‘laissez faire’ of the government in economic activities.

Definition of Economics Given by Adam Smith: “Economics is a science that
explores the nature and reason of the wealth of nations.” Economics grows
centring wealth or resources. So to acquire resources is the main purpose of
people’s economic activities, The weaknesses of Smith’s definition are; 1) In
this definition there is no mention of how economics would satisfy people's
unlimited wants by means of their limited resources. 2) Although national
resources have been given more emphasis in this definition, persons and their
activities have been ignored. 3) Acquiring resources has been emphasized
whereas how these resources would be acquired has not been mentioned. 4) In
this definition, resources stand for goods, but there is no mention of services.

2023
2025

Introduction to Economics 5

Definition of Economics Given by Professor Marshall: Professor Alfred
Marshall emphasizes human welfare more than resources, He says, “Economics
discusses the general activities of human life.” The basic point of discussion
about economics is the income of human beings and their expenditure of that
money for the purpose of satisfying their wants. That is, the main purpose of
economics is to accomplish human welfare. Marshall has only discussed the
accomplishment of human welfare in real life. Whereas at present, the problem
of searcity is the main problem of economics, and this basic issue has not been
taken into consideration in the definition of Marshall. Marshall and his followers
Robins, Jevons, Walras, Edgeworth Pareto etc. are known as the Neo-classical.

Definition of Economics Given by Professor L. Robins: Professor L. Robins
has defined economics in such a way that it has been much more acceptable than
the definitions given by others. In his opinion, “Economics is a science that
analyses human behavior related to the combination of unlimited wants and
aliernatively usable scarce resources.” The characteristics of this definition are:
1) Human wants are unlimited and the nature and volume of the wants are
different. 2) The resource and time to fulfill the wants are very limited. 3) One
very important part of the discussion of economics is how to adjust unlimited
wants by means of limited resources. 4) As the supply of the resources is limited,
we have to try to satisfy our varied wants with the same resources, 5) Wants are
to be satisfied on the basis of their priority. For these reasons, this definition is
considered to be a more acceptable one.

Criticism of the Definition of Robins: 1) Robins has observed the subject
matter of economics from a wider point of view. 2) Human beings often like
some things in their personal and social lives, which are not discussed in
economics. 3) It is not mentioned that the main purpose of economic activities is
human welfare. 4) The social position of economics has not been discussed in
Robins’ definition. 5) The economic development of the modem world has not
been included in his definition. 6) Robins has only discussed economics with
price, but he skipped to discuss national income, employment system,
investment, distribution, etc.
6 Economics

Concept of Keynesian Economics: In the context of 1930’s great depression
the laissez faire doctrine of the classical economists proved totally futile, At that
time, British Economist John Maynard Keynes raised strong logic in favour of
the government interference to uplift the economy from the recession, Accord-
ing to Keynes, due to different reasons, marketing system can not provide the
solution of the economic problem, However, interference of the government that
means the increasing of government expenditure; decreasing the tax rate and
increasing of entire consumption help to come out from the recession.

1.3.1 Microeconomics and Macroeconomics
The main two branches of economics are:

1, Microeconomics

2. Macroeconomics

Microeconomics refers to the micro unit of economics and Macroeconomics
refers to aggregate economic behaviour.

Difference between Micro and Macro Economics:

Microeconomics: The branch of economics which discusses the behaviour of
an individual, household, a farm or analysis marketing of a comodity is called
Microeconomics.

Macroeconomics: The economics that analysis the total behaviour (such as:
total consumption, total investment, national production, unemployability,
income and expenditure of govt. inflation, international trade etc.) of economics
is called Macroeconomics.

1.4 The Ten Principles of Economics

We have to meet unlimited wants from the perspective of limitation of resources
in our society. According to economist Gregory Mankiw, before discussing
concepts and ideas of economics, it is important to know about the ten
fundamental principles of economics. ‘These are:

2025
2025

~J

Introduction to Economics

1. People Face Trade-offs

To get something that we like we often have to sacrifice some other thing that we
also like. To give an example, if you spend all your time studying economics,
you will have to keep off from studying Bangla or English. Similarly, if you are
watching television, you will not be able to spend time for playing. If the
government is spending more for the military sector in the budget, it is reducing
its expenditure in other civil sectors including the education sector. That is, a
person in society chooses an alternative for a trade-off.

2. Opportunity Cost

If you are spending time at school for your studies, you cannot help your father
or mother with their work at home or outside. Whereas if you were involved in
any economic activity that your parents are domg, they would be monetarily
benefitted. But you are studying at school (not helping with your parents’
economic activity). Here not being able to work for your parents because of your
studies is the opportunity cost of studies.

3. Rational People Think at the Margin

People think at the margin. After the feast at a wedding ceremony, some of you
may think that it would have been better if you had eaten a Little more, and some
others may think that it would have been better if you had eaten a little less. This
little more to eat ora little less to eat is the marginal eating. Suppose, you have
achieved an A in economics. You might think that if you had studied a little
more, you could have obtained an A+. Human beings also think of marginal
advantages and disadvantages. For example, you ate three bananas one after
another, The third banana is the marginal banana. The satisfaction you got from
the marginal banana is known as the marginal utility. To have that third banana,
the money that you have spent is known as the marginal cost. As a rational
being, you will eat the marginal banana only when the marginal utility will be
greater than the marginal cost.
g Economics

4, People Respond to Incentives

Inspiration or incentives play an important role in every task. If people get
incentives, they perform their job with better care. If your father tells you that he
will buy you a bicycle if you can get a GPA 5, surely your enthusiasm for studies
will be greatly enhanced. Similarly, in economics if the labourers get incentives,
they will produce more.

5. Trade can Make Everyone Better-Off

The United States produces cars cheap, and we can produce garments cheap. In
the circumstances, if we trade with the States giving them our garments in
exchange for their cars, we both will profit from the trade.

6. Markets are Usually a Good Way to Organize Economic Activities

Economic activities are organized by the market system, The reciprocal actions
and reactions between the firms and the households determine the price of any
goods. The owners of the firms supply goods observing the market demands and
numerous households buy these goods and services as per their incomes and
needs. So market prices are determined by the actions and reactions between
demand and supply.

7. Government can Sometimes Improve Market Outcomes

The market system is run by the signal of the ‘invisible hand’. But it always does
not turn out to be correct. For many reasons, the invisible hand fails to succeed.
In these situations governmental interventions are a must. The interventions are
necessary to ensure the proper supply of goods like education, health, law and
order, electricity, etc., the proper utilization of resources, and to prevent the
centralized monopoly of resources, environmental pollution and corruption.

8. A Country's Standard of Living Depends on Its Ability te Produce Goods
and Services

The standard of living of those countries is high whose capabilities for producing
goods and services are better. The production capacity of the people of

20125
Introduction to Economics 9

developed countries is much better and as a result their per capita income is
much higher. The per capita income in 2018 in the United States was $62794.6 and
in Japan was $39290 (Source: The World Bank). As a result, they have better
food, better healthcare and better civic facilities. The working capacity of the
workers also increases. They can produce many more goods and services in less
time and less labour.

9. Prices Rise When the Government Prints Too Much Money

The power to print money rests with the central bank. If the central bank prints
too much money, inflation will occur. That means the price level of goods rises.
Inflation causes the value of money to fall. For example, you can get the
necessary materials for your studies, spending taka 500. But when the value of
money falls, you will have to spend taka 650 to get the same things, which is taka
150 more (650-500=150). As the prices of goods go up, you have to spend more
money to get the same things.

10. Society Faces a Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and
Unemployment

The rise in the price level of the goods is known as inflation. The unemployed
people are those labourers who want to work at the market wages but cannot get
jobs. When inflation decreases, unemployment rises. On the other hand, when
unemployment diminishes, inflation increases.

1.5 The Circular Flow of Income ( the two sectors)

In economics who are involved with production, exchange, consumption and
distribution are called economic agent. These agents interact with each other in
the marketing process.

There are two types of agents in a simple economy: consumers or households and
producers or firms. How the income and expenditure flow in a circular motion
between these two types of agents are shown here in the diagram below.

Forma-2, Economics Class 9-10
10 Economics

Income Goods & Service Expenditure

market Lag

Goods & Goods &
services sell services purchase
ace Households
Factors of Labour, land,
production capital
Factors of
~ production market
Wage, rent, Interest Income

Diagram: Circular flow of Income

In the above diagram, it is observed that there are two types of agents in econom-
ies. For example, the firms and the households, Firms or the owners of the firms
purchase the materials of production. Later they organize these materials and
produce goods and services, They supply these produced goods and services to
the market or sell these. On the other hand, households earn by selling different
elements of production under their ownership such as labour, land and capital.
(Labour earns wages, the owners of land earn rents and capital earns interest.
Meeting all these expenditures, an entrepreneur sells the produced goods or
services to the market. The entrepreneur keeps excess profit for themselves
before selling produced goods or services. For this reason the surplus income of
the entrepreneur is called profit). The households purchase goods or services
from the firms with their income. Thus the wheel of economy revolves around
the circular flow of produced goods, services and income. And this is known as
“the circular flow of income”.

1.6, Different Types of Economic Systems

Our resources are limited but our demand is unlimited. Limitation of wealth and
searcity of wealth is the economic reality of human life. For this reason, we

2023
2025

Introduction to Economics 11

have to face many problems. To a greater extent, these problems are considered
as the fundamental economic problem, The problems are as follows:

a) What will we produce and what will we not produce? For instance. will
we produce paddy, or clothes?

b) What type of technology or machine will we use for production? What
do we want to produce?

c) For whom will we produce? Who will consume it?
Different types of economic system have been developed in the world on the
basis of economic problem solving process. The main of these systems are:
| .Capitalistic or market economic system
2. Socialistic or command economic system
3. Mixed economic systern
4, Islamic economic system

1, Capitalistic or Market Economic System

In this economic system production materials are private properties. Without
any interference from government in automated price system the entire
economme activities are run by non-governmental initiatives. This type of
economy is called Capitalistic or Market economy. The capitalistic economy
started in whole Europe during the end of the 18" century after the French
revolution. Classical economist Adam Smith and his followers used to support
this economic system,

Characteristics of Capitalistic or Market Economy

The major characteristics of the capitalist economy are mentioned below:

|. Private Property: In capitalist economy, majority of the resources or
the materials of production of the society are under individual ownership.
The owner can exchange or consume these properties.

2. Private Enterprise: In capitalism maximum economic activities,
e.g. production, exchange, distribution. consumption, etc are run by
individual enterprises. Governmental interference is not expected in these
enterprises.
12 Economics

3. Free Competition: In this system, many firms get involved in free
competition regarding the production of goods and services. As a result,
the prices of the goods remain less and newer inventions are possible.

4. Automatic Price System: The price of the goods is determined through the
bargaining between the sellers and the buyers.

5. Profit: The producer, in capitalism, produces for the target of the highest
profit possible.

6. Consumers’ Liberty: Every consumer is free to buy and consume goods
according to his‘her individual choice, wish and taste. The producer
supplies goods as per the demand of the consumer and the opportunity of
profit,

7. Inequality of Income: In a capitalist society there remains a greater
inequality of income between the rich and the genera! people in society. To
some extent, unemployment is inevitable in capitalist economy.

8. Role of the Government: Government, in this system, remains engaged in
the maintenance of law and order, protecting the state, and securing the
rights of wealth.

The activities of the capitalist economy are run in different sectors of
economy, through mutual dependence. None works selflessly; rather everyone
performs the economic activities for their own interests.

Solution

a) In this system all the decisions are determined according to the logic of the
market. For example, if the demand and price of any goods is higher, the
production of these goods will also be higher. The relative demand of the market
will determine the order of production.

b) Due to technology the production cost can be the lowest in the market. Goods
will have to be produced by using this technology.

c) The owners will earn or consume according to price of production determined
in the market.

2023
2025

Introduction to Economics 13

So it is observed that the production, the process of production and the
distribution of production are determined by market through the competition of
the owners of materials and the sellers and buyers. The buyers and sellers are the
personal owners of the total wealth and production materials. The price of
productions and others are determined by the internal activities of the buyers and
sellers.

2. Socialistic or Command Economic System

In socialist economy, the state or the society holds the ownership of most of
the resources and factors of production. State or society is the owner of the
majority of the industries and institutions of production and they are run by the
directions of the government. The state or the society decides which products
will be produced and in what quantity, how and for whom.

Characteristics of Socialistic or Command Economic System

1. State or Social Ownership Resources: In socialist economy
government is the owner of most of the resources (land, industries, mines,
ete.) and factors of production. Co-operative organizations and joint social
groups work under state.

2. Central Planning: State or government decides all planning centrally. The
productions and distributions are done according to this plan.

3. Lack of Consumers’ Freedom: In most of the cases in socialism, the
consumers consume the goods that are produced by state and central
planning. No consumer produces or consumes anything spending money on
his/her own will.

4. Lack of Free Competition: As the production in maximum cases is run by
state enterprise, there is no free competition among the huge number of
private entrepreneurs.

5. Absence of private Profit: In socialism production is run for national
demand and overall welfare of the state not for private profits. So no
industry is developed by private enterprises. Agriculture, industry and trade
all are under the ownership of state and social ownership. So there is no
private profit.
14 Economics

Solution

In this system the central authority determines what products will be produced.
Here the owner of the total wealth and production materials is the state or
society. As their representative the Central Planning Ministry finally determines
everything such as the types of production, choice of technology, price, income
and consumption, etc. All the players of economy have to follow their
instructions as law. So, this system is called the command system. In this system
priority is given to social interest or social welfare. other than self interest or
profit.

Group task: Present the comparison of the capitalist and socialist economic
system.

3. Mixed Economic System

The economy in which individual ownership and private enterprise exist side by
side with state enterprise and control, is known as the mixed economy. That is,
in this economic system, private and state enterprises play a combined role. In
most of the countries of the world, mixed economy exists for example, the
United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, Bangladesh, India, etc.

Characteristic of Mixed Economy

In different countries of the world, the characteristics of mixed economy are of
different kinds. Usually, the following characteristics of mixed economy are
observed:

1. The Private Co-operative and State Ownership of Resources: In mixed
economy an individual can freely possess and enjoy his/her movable and
immovable properties and also can trade those off. Side by side with that, the
government runs the institutions that provide the public properties
(highway) and services (healtheare).

2. Private Enterprise: In mixed economy, most of the economic activities

along with production, trading, distribution and consumption, are organized
and conducted by private enterprises.

2025
2025

Introduction to Economics 15

3. State Enterprise: In mixed cconomy, state enterprises are undertaken
alongside private enterprises. The vital and heavy industries, national
security and institutions that are significantly public-related, are conducted
by the state.

4. Profit: It is possible to earn profits by conducting maximum economic
activities in the private sector.

5. Freedom of the Consumer: In this system, the consumer enjoys full
freedom regarding the trading and consuming of general products. However,
if the government deems it necessary, it can influence the price of the goods
and control the production and consumption of any goods as per its
necessity, for example, smoking, production of drugs and consumption, ete.

Many people consider this mixed economy as a better economic system since
pure capitalism or socialism can be found nowhere in the world, In this systems,
private and public sectors remain side by side. For this reason, besides individual
freedom government’s control remain in the field of production, exchange,
distribution and consumption.

Islamic Economic System
The economic system which is developed on the belief of fundamental roles of
Islam is called Islamic economic system.

Characteristic of Islamic Economic System

In Islamic economic system,it is said that all the resources of the world have to
be used for the welfare of human kind. The important characteristics of this
system are as follows:

1. Belief in Islam: The fundamental rules of Islamic economy are complied and
directed according to religion, religious philosophy, religious customs, rules
and regulations.

te Interest-Free Deposit: Islamic economic system does not allow interest.
Here interest-free deposit system is conducted in banking sectors.
16 Economics

3. Zakat and Fitra: Zakat based distribution system has been introduced in
this system. For this. Zakat and fitra are collected from the rich in order to
distribute among them the poor.

In this system, all the economic activities are conducted by the laws of Islam. In
the context of production and consumption the laws of Quran and Sunnah have

to be followed.

Task: Which economic system is similar to the economic system of Bangladesh?
Explain.

Exercise

Short Questions

1, What is meant by scarcity and unlimited wants?

2. Illustrate the definition of economics given by Adam Smith.
3. What is meant by the circular flow of income?

4, What is capitalistic economic system?

5. What is mixed economic system?

Descriptive Questions

1, Discuss the origin and development of economics.
2. Define economics. Which of the definitions is more acceptable and why?

3, Discuss the ten principles of economics.

20125
Introduction to Economics Vy
Multiple-Choice Questions

1. Whois the father of economics?
a. David Ricardo b. Aristotle
c. Adam Smith d. L. Robins

2. Market is a good medium to organize economic activities. Because, there
a. one can bargain.
b. one can buy consumer products at a cheap price.

c, goods can be produced according to the demand.

Which one of the following is correct?
a. land ii b. iand ili

©. and iii d. i, di and iti

Read the following passage and answer question numbers 3 and 4

Nabil went to the market to buy sugar and found that the price of sugar is too
high. A buyer standing beside him told hira that sugar is being sold at the
governmental selling centre at a reasonable price just across the street.

3. Which economic system is prevailing in Nabil's country?
a. islamic b. mixed

c. capitalistic d. socialistic

4. In the economic system of Nabil's country,

a, there grows mequality of income. b. interest-free loan is exchanged.
c. stability of price is persistent. d. there is no freedom of private
enterprise.

Forma-3, Economics Class 9-10
18 Economics

Creative Questions

Nadi’s father says to Nadi- “If you do well in the exam, I will buy a bicycle for
you.” Hearing this Nadi becomes happy and thinks, if she gets the cycle, she will
be able to go to college by riding it. In this way, she can save her fare. So by
decreasing time for sports and watching television, she studies more for making
good result.

a. According to landowner, which one is the production sector?
b. What do you understand by scarcity? Explain.
c. Inthe above stem which subjects are found of economics? Explain.

d. Do you think besides the referred issues in the stem, there are more
relevant issues? Explain with your opinion.

2, Asad has been living in couniry ‘A’ for a long time. Recently he came to visit
his own country and he told his younger brother about the experiences of his life
abroad, The per capita income of the people of that country is very high. The
owner of the institution that he works for did not need permission from the
government before establishing his factory. And also, he can consume any
product that he likes.

a. Itlustrate the definition of economics given by Adam Smith.
b. Describe the importance of incentive in economics.

c. Explain the real face of the existing economic system of the country ‘A’.
d. Analyse the difference betweenthe economic system of the country ‘A’ and
that of Bangladesh.

2025
