Chapter Ten
Geographical Description of Bangladesh

Bangladesh is an independent country of South Asia. The Tropic of Cancer has
crossed through the middle of the country for its geographical location. There are
various types of physiographic characteristics : rivers, location of the Bay of Bengal,
hilly areas and seasonal climate change brought a diversity in this country.

At the end of this chapter. we will be able to—

*

describe geographical location and physiography of Bangladesh;
describe the main rivers, tributaries and distributaries;

describe reasons of filling up the rivers and wetland caused by human; their
influence and ways of prevention;

create awareness about the harmful influence of filling up the rivers and
wetlands;

describe the characteristics of climate, seasonal temperatures, wind and rainfall;

2025
2025

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 149

® describe the characteristics of monsoon climate and norwester;

* take precaution and safety measures against norwester and lightning and
make other people aware about it.

Location : Bangladesh is located in South Asia in the southern part of the continent
of Asia, Bangladesh is an independent country. This country is situated between
20°34' North latitude and 26°38‘ North latitude and between 38° 01’ East longitude

and 92°41' East longitude. The Tropic of Cancer passes through the central part of
Bangladesh.

a a an ar ar
BANGLADESH
Las en ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS
rd Invarngsticntal Bounderp ne — Capital .
: Cena dyn, DM sioe Beurdary ee Division Hendaageised
{ 5 ee) Eaatier ‘i District b eo
oy ae " Rivers ee
* 2 fF ENOIA uw
owes Bengal? dhaty i (Meghalaya
Tr.

ce nt ar

Fig. 10.1 : Administrative units of Bangladesh
130 Geography and Environment

Area: The total area of Bangladesh is 1,47,570 square kilometres. According to
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics 1996-97, the area under rivers is 9,405 square
kilometres and that of the forest is 21,657 square kilometres. Territorial waters is
12 nautical miles and exclusive economic zone is 200 nautical miles and the
oceanic boundary is till the end of the continental shelf.

The ocean boundary of Bangladesh was limited within 130 nautical miles due to the
claim of equidistant method by Myanmar and India. In this way, Bangladesh would
get 50,000 square kilometres less. To establish the sea boundary and to have rights on
the sea resources, Bangladesh lodged a case against Myanmar on 14th December 2009
in Sea Law tribunal in Hamburg in Germany and against India in an arbitration
tribunal at Hague in Netherlands, Bangladesh received the historical verdict on
I4th March, 2012 against Myanmar from the International Court. Due to this verdict
Bangladesh gained more than 1,00,000 square kilometres of sea boundary. Through this
verdict St Martin’s Island has been made the coastal baseline and [rom there 12 nautical
miles have been selected as the Territorial sea and 200 nautical miles as the Exclusive
economic zone. Area under the sea is the continental shelf, beyond is in the possession
of Bangladesh and sovereign right to all natural resources has been established.
According to this estimate 350 nautical miles from the coast of Bangladesh in the
continental shelf under the gea is the territory of Bangladesh,

Boundary : Bangladesh is surrounded by India in three sides. In the north there is West
Bengal, Meghalaya and Assam, to the east is Assam, Tripura, Mizoram and Myanmar
(Burma), and to the south is the Bay of Bengal and to the west is the State of West
Bengal. The total length of the boundary of Bangladesh is about 4,711 lalometres of
which about 3,715 lolometres exist between Bangladesh and India, and the boundary
between Myanmar and Bangladesh is only 280 ldlometres and the coastal boundary
extends to the south of 716 lclometres (fig.10.1). In south-west of Bangladesh
Hariabhanga river and in south-east Naf river demarcates the boundary with India

and Myanmar respectively.

2025
2025

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 131
Task ; Complete the table ina group.
What is the | Whatis the | Whatis the | Whatis the} Whatis the | Up to how
location of | area of extent of extent of | length of much
Bangladesh | Bangladesh? | exclusive | the coastal depth is the
in Latitude economic | territorial | boundary sea righis
and zone? walters? between on the
Longitude? Bangladesh | continental
and the Bay | shelf?
of Bengal?

Physiography of Bangladesh

The physiography of a country influences agriculture, industry, trade and
commerce, transport and communication system. The influences of physiography
in the economic development of Bangladesh is enormous.

Bangladesh is one of the largest deltas of the world. The Ganges, the Brahmaputra,
and the Meghna flowing ftom the west, north and south-east respectively have
together formed this huge delta,

Plains are ideal for permanent settlement. Greater part of Bangladesh is an extensive
plain. On the basis of natural features Bangladesh can be classified into three
physiographic divisions. These are :
1. The Hills of the Tertiary period.
2. The Terraces of Pleistocene period, and

3. The Recent Flood Plains.
152

Geography and Environment

Description of the natural features are given below in detail (fig. 10.2).

L pal

ag? g0° a1" a2"
BANGLADESH
PHYSIOGRAPHY
LEGEND

FES Hil of Tetuary Age
Ternces of Fisiocene Age
(4 The Five Plas of Recon Times

BAY OF BENGAL

ag? 0° Th a?

Fig. 10.2 : Physiograply of Bangladesh

2025
Geographical Description of Bangladesh 153

1.The Hills of the tertiary period : This region covers the hills of the south-east and
north-eastern parts of Bangladesh. These Hills were formed along with the
formation of the Himalayan Mountains. and so, these are called the Hills of Tertiary
period. It is assumed that Lusai of Assam and the Arakan of Myanmar (Burma) are
considered to be of the same age. These hills are formed of the sandstone. shale and
mud, The hills of this region are divided into two, such as : (a) Hills of the South-
East. (b) Hills of the North and North-East.

(a) Hills of the South-East : Rangamati, Bandarban, Khagrachhari, Cox’s Bazar
and the eastern part of Chattogram cover this region. The average height of these
hills is 610 metres. The highest peaks, of Bangladesh is Tajingdong (1,280 metres)
located in the south-eastern part of this region in Bandarban district.

(b) Hills of the north and north-east : The hills in the north of Mymensingh
and Netrokona districts, in the north-east of Sylhet district and the hills of
the south of Moulvibazar and Habiganj are not more than 244 metres in height. The

hills of the north are locally known as Tila. The height of these Tilas varies from 30
to 90 metres.

2. The terraces of pleistocene period : The Pleistocene period is over 25,000
years old. The Barind of the north-west, Madhupur and Bhawal Garh of the central
part and the Lalmai hills or highland of Cumilla district cover this region. It is thought
that these terraces were formed during the Pleistocene period. The description of these
highlands are given below.

(a) The Barind : The Barind covers an area of 9.320 square kilometres in the north-
western region of the country. The height of this region above the flood plain is about
6 to 12 metres. The colour of the soil is grey and red.

(b) The Madhupur and Bhawal Garh : The Madhupur is situated im Tangail
and Mymensingh districts and the Bhawal Garh is in Gazipur district, The area is
about 4,103 square kilometres. The height of this region above the plain land is
about 30 metres. The colour of the soil is grey and red.

Forma-20, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10
154 Geography and Environment

(ce) Lalmai hills : The Lalmai Hills stretch from Lalmai, 8 kilometres to the west of
Cumilla town to Mynamati. This region covers an area of 34 square kilometres and
the average height is 2] metres.

3. The recent flood plains; Excepting the hills and the Terraces, the whole of
Bangladesh is a plain land drained by rivers. Innumerable small and big rivers are
found everywhere in Bangladesh. These rivers flow through the plain land causing
floods during rainy seasons. This flood plain has been formed due to the deposition of

the sediments brought down by the rivers for years together. The total area of this
flood plain is 1,24.266 square kilometres.

This plain land slopes towards the coast from the north of Bangladesh. The Sundarban
region stands almost at sea level. The other regions such as Dinajpur stands at a
height of 37.50 metres, Bogura at 20.00 metres, Mymensingh at 18.00 metres,
Narayanganj and Jashore at § metres. Innumerable marshy and lowlands are scattered
throughout this region. Some of these are abandoned Ox-bow lakes. Locally, these
are known as beel, jheel or haor. Of these,the Chalan Beel and the haors of Madaripur
and Sylhet are remarkable.These are submerged during the rainy season and turn into
lakes. The layer of the soil of the whole flood plain is very deep and very fertile, The

recent Hood plain can be divided into several divisions, viz.
(a) Piedmont Plain of Rangpur and Dinajpur,

(b) The Flood Plain of Dhaka. Tangail, Mymensingh, Jamalpur, Pabna, Cumilla,
Noakhali and Sylhet.
(c) The Deltaic Plain compnsing of some parts of Dhaka, Khulna, Faridpur, Kushta

and Jashore,

(d) The Flat Coastal Plain of Chattogram extending from the lower part of Noakhali
and Feni rivers to Cox’s Bazar,

(¢) The Tidal Plain or the Mangrove Forest comprising of some part of Khulna,
Patuakhali region and Barguna district.

2025
2025

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 155

‘These regions are very fertile and remarkable for its agricultural production,

Task : Find out the different plrysical features in different districts of Bangladesh
in an Atlas and write it down in a copy in a group.

Main rivers of Bangladesh

Bangladesh has about 700 rivers. Due to the presence of a large number of rivers,
Bangladesh is called a Riverine country. The Rivers influence the life style of the
people of Bangladesh. The Padma, the Brahmaputra, the Jamuna, the Meghna and the
Karmaphuli are the major rivers of Bangladesh. These rivers also have their tributaries
and distributaries. The total length of all the rivers including tribuiaries and
distributaries is about 22,155 kilometres. The description of the rivers of Bangladesh is
viven below (fig. 10.3),

The Padma : The Padma is one of the major rivers of Bangladesh. This has originated
from the Gongotri, glacier. Then it flows to the south-west and then to the south-east
taking the name of the Ganges at Haridwar and enters into the plane lands. From this
point, the Ganges flow through Uttar Pradesh and Bihar State leaving distributary
named Bhagirathi (Hooghly) river at Dhulian of Murshidabad district in West Bengal.

The Bhagirathi falls into the Bay of Bengal. The main flow of the Ganges takes the
name of Padma at the south-western point at Rajshahi district and flows for about
145 kilometres through West Bengal and along the border of Bangladesh. It enters into
Bangladesh through the north-western point of Kushtia district. Then it meets the
Jamuna river at Daulatdia, This combined stream flows towards the south-east as
the Padma and meets the Meghna at Chandpur. Afterwards, the combined flow of
these three rivers fall into the Bay of Bengal as the Meghna. The Padma drains an
area of 34,188 square kilometres. The Kumar, Mathabhanga, Bhairab, Gorai,
Madhumati, Arial khan etc. are the distributaries of the Padma river and the
Mahananda is the main tributary. Punarbhava, Nagor, Pagla, Kulik and Tangan are
the tributaries of Mahananda.
156 Geography and Environment

BANGLADESH
RIVERS me

e LEGEND
a iain Rivers a

Thibanay River. Sa

Disvibwtary dagen
INDIA a5"
(Meghalaya!

BAY OF BENGAL

cel es" ag
Fig. 10.3 ; Rivers of Bangladesh

The Brahmaputra : The Brahmaputra river originated from Manas Sarovar near
Kailash peak of the Himalayas and then flows to the east over Tibet and finally passes
through Assam to the west. Thereatier, the Brahmaputra river enters into Bangladesh
near Kurigram. This river takes a tum towards south-east near Dewanganj and then
flowing through the district of Mymensingh falls at Meghna to the south of Bhairab

2025
2025

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 157

Bazar. Dharla and Tista are the main tributaries and Bangshi and Sitalakhya are the
major distributaries of the Brahmaputra river.

The Jamuna : The main branch of the Brahmaputra near Dewanganj of Mymensineh
district flows towards south as Jamuna to meet the Ganges river near Daulatdia and
flows as Padma. Karotoa and Atrai are the major tributaries of the Jamuna and
Dhaleshwari is its distributary, Whereas Buriganga is the distributary of Dhaleshwari.

The Meghna : The Barak river of Assam originates from Naga-Manipur region and
being divided into two branches as Surma and Kushtyara, enter into Sylhet district
of Bangladesh. Surma, the northern branch, flows towards west by the side of
Sylhet, Chhatak and Sunamganj. The Surma of north Sylhet, the Kushivara of south
Sylhet, the Kalni of Habiganj meet together near Ajmiriganj, Then the combined
stream of Kalni, the Surma and the Kushryara after flowing some distance to the
south as Meghna. joins the old Brahmaputra in the south of Bhairab Bazar and after
flowing to the south-west it meets the Padme near Chandpur and ultimately falls into the
Bay of Bengal as Meghna. The Meghna drains an area of about 29,785 square
kilometres. Monu, Baulai, Titas, Gumu, are the tributaries of Meghna.

The Karnaphuli : Two hundred and seventy four kilometres long Karnaphuli
river originated from the Lusai Hills in Assam and flowing through Rangamati and
Chattogram falls into the Bay of Bengal. This is the main river of Chattogram and
Rangamati. The major tributaries of Karnaphuli river are Kassalong, Halda, and
Boalkhali, A hydroelectric project has been constructed at Kaptai on Karnaphuli. The
main sea port of Bangladesh is situated on the south of the Karnaphuli tiver,

Task ; Fill im the table in a group (time-15 minutes).

Name of main) Origin | Location | Course | Distributary Tributary
river of the falls

Padma
Brahmputra

Jamuna

Meghna

L58 Geography and Environment

Causes of river and wetlands fillings, its impact and prevention

Tn Bangladesh river and wetland filling have many natural and man-made causes.
Major portion of Bangladesh is made up of alluvial deposits. One characteristic of alluvium
is that it mixes easily with water as it is a soluble matter. During rainy season in the
north eastern side of Bangladesh in the neighbouring countries like China, Nepal,
Myanmar and the Indian states of Assam and Meghalaya have a heavier rainfall.
In the raimy season high velocity mountainous rivers in the upstream bring down
alluvium and causes river bank erosion. In the downstream the velocity of the river
decreases and the alluvium is deposited on the river bed and eventually the depth of
the river is reduced and the navigability. Within the country, on the banks of the
rivers and wetlands, unplanned dams, roads, industries, residential construction,
encroachinent and filling up is leading to the destruction of the rivers and

wetlands. Water dispute with the neighbouring country is the cause of withdrawal
of water from the major rivers during dry season decreasing the velocity of river
causing deposition at. the mouth of the river,

In rainy season due to filling up of rivers and wetlands water flow is obstructed and
it over flows the banks causing floods. During dry season, as there is not enough
water in the rivers and wetlands which reduce the navigability, fish cultivation and
irigation.Conservation of water in the reservoir through natural process is gradually
declining and supply of sweet water in the cities is declining resulting in
environmental degradation.To overcome these problems regular dredging to maintain
ithe navigability of the rivers durmg ramy season and winter, planned and environment
friendly dam construction and other development projects should be undertaken. We
should stop encroachment of rivers and hill cutting, rescue wetlands from grabbers,
make mandatory effluent treatment plants for the industries. We should resolve water
dispute with India, Nepal and China and get the proper amount of water for the rivers
Ganges, Tista, Brahmaputra and Feni. Environmental law should be enforced and

revised according jo the need of the time so that greater environmental disaster can be

avoided, Use of underground water should be reduced and increased and the use
of river water should be encouraged.

Task : How to prevent filling up of rivers and wetlands? Discuss in group and write it
down in a copy or poster paper.

2025
2025

Geographical Description of Bangladesh

Climate

159

The climate of Bangladesh is moderate. As the Tropic of Cancer passes through the
centre of the country, the prevailing climate is tropical. The influence of the
Monsoon wind on the climate of this country is so strong that as a whole, the
climate of Bangladesh is known as tropical monsoon climate. In a monsoon

climate of there are different seasons in a year.

a w a ue ge"
oe BANGLADESH
ae va ‘ SYINDIA Temperature (July)
f A (CELSIUS)
oe o 82 4th fowmeiees

Les” TNTEA
CMa Berga! =

ey a a! a a

Fig. 10.4: Temperature of Bangladesh (July)

But Bangladesh
experiences extreme cold
and warm climate. In fact,
hot and humid summer
and dry and comfortable

winter are the remarkable

never

characteristics of the
climate of Bangladesh. The
average annual temperature
is 26.01° Celsius and the
average rainfall is about 203
centimetres, Due to monsoon,
rainy season extends from
June to October im
this country (fig. 10.4).
The highest rainfall in
Bangladesh occurs at Sylhet.

On the basis of monsoon, rainfall and annual temperature, the climate of
Bangladesh is divided into three seasons, viz. (a) Summer season, (b) Rainy season

and (¢) Winter season.

(a) Summer season : The summer season in Bangladesh extends from the month of
March to May (Falgun to Jaishtha), The temperature starts increasing in this season, as

the sun shines vertically rays over the tropic of cancer during this period The
temperature, wind direction and the rainfall of this season and discussed below ;
160 Geography and Environment

Temperature : The summer is the hottest season in Bangladesh. During this
season, the maximum temperature of 34° Celsius and the lowest of 21° Celsius are
recorded. The average temperature of 28° Celsius prevails in the month of April.

April is the hottest month.The temperature increase gradually from the coastal region
to the interior of the country.

Rainfall : The thunderstorm or the Norwester is one of the important characteristics
of summer weather. Kalbaishakhi is the local name of thunderstorm or norwester
which happens with thunder, lightning and hail storm during the months of March
and April in the afternoon. About 20 percent of the annual rainfall of Bangladesh
happens in summer due to Kalbaishakhi storms. During this time the average
rainfall recorded is about 51 centimetres (fig. 10.5).

Wind : A change in air pressure takes place due to the northward movement of the sun
in the northern hemisphere. The hot and humid air coming from the south rises
upward due to high temperature and comes in contact with the cold and dry air
coming from the north causing rainfall with thunderstorms.

(b) Rainy season : The rainy ir w a a a

BANGLADESH
season extends from June to|,,. Annual Average Rainfall ,-
October (Jaishtha to Kartik) in ’ Oe ii

Bangladesh. The period between t a aoe
summer and winter with fain is; ow “4 iL Abo
known as the rainy season. PE
the first half of June, the rain ge i
season starts with the advent of
monsoon wind. The charactertics
of rainy season are discussed |,

below :

Temperature : The sun shines
vertically during rainy season in
Bangladesh. As a result, the
temperature increases. But due to par
cloud cover and heavy downpour, .
the high temperature is not |+#—@—""

very uncomfortable. The average %%

ar ar ag a Abe

Fig. 10.5: Annual average rainfall of Bangladesh

temperature is 27° Celsius.

2025
Geographical Description of Bangladesh il

Rainfall : During the rainy season, south-west monsoon wind blowing over
Bangladesh brings heavy moisture from the Indian Ocean and the Bay of Bengal.
This moisture causes heavy convectional rainfall. 80 percent of the total annual

rainfall occurs during this time.

Wind: There is change in air pressure due to the location of the sun over Bangladesh
in the month of June. The rainy season begins when the south-west trade wind staris
blowing from the Bay of Bengal. During this time, the south-east trade wind after
crossing the equator, according to Ferrel’s Law, deflect towards right and it becomes
south-west monsoon wind. This water vapour filled air is abstracted by the
Himalayas in the north of Bangladesh which causes heavy rainfall. This is the
beginning of rainy season. After the rainy season is over, cyclone hits Bangladesh
occasionally.

(c) Winter season : The period from the end of November to February (Kartik to
Falgun) is known as winter. The temperature starts declining after September and
October. The lowest temperature is recorded in January (fig. 10.6).

Temperature : The minimum temperature is found in winter in our country. During
this season, the maximum temperature of 29° Celsius and the minimum of 11° Celsius
is recorded. The coldest month is January and the average temperature recorded 1s
17.7° Celsius. During winter, the temperature decreases from the coast to the north.
In the history of Bangladesh, the lowest temperature recorded was 1° Celsius in
1905 in the district of Dinajpur im the northern region.

Forma-21, Geography and Environment, Class-9-10
162

Geography and Environment
ar we a a e Rainfall : During winter,
BSHeUAbeSH Bangladesh does not normally

. “< Temperature (Janua S
"° oe eS heel Ty) experience any rainfall. At this

time, the north-east cold monsoon

| | wind blows over Bangladesh. A
a little amount of rainfall occurs
ms in the coastal and in the

ba —-“J | mountainous regions during
— F ‘
wo pet winter. The rainfall accounts for
ty not more than 10 centimetres.

faa” WHA (= Ae

oer)

e

inpia *. cae \. € (ome! Wind : During winter season,
the humidity in the air is less as
the cold Monsoon wind blows
from the north-east over

\ ! ‘
heppytl 38 “at! Bangladesh. The lowest humidity
OP Ps i NY recorded during this time is 36
BAY OF BENGAL \. 2, | percent. Sometimes, very cold
Vi wind blows over the northern
we uP ont a &

region and as a result. it
Fig. 10.6 : Temperature of Bangladesh (January) experiences very cold weather,

Monsoon wind : In the beginning of June warm and humid south-west monsoon
wind blowing from Bayof Bengal is obstructed in the hilly areas of east and northern
rezion of Bangladesh causing rainfall. From June to October rainfall occurs all over
Bangladesh due to monsoon wind and that is the rainy season. Four-fifths of the
annual rainfall takes place during rainy season. Cloudy sky and heavy rainfall
lower the temperature more than summer season. Summer extends from March-
May. April is the hottest month, But the temperature does not vary much till
September. The two seasons can be differentiated on the basis of humidity but not
on temperature. In summer season the temperature of the alr increases from the
coastal area towards north in the interior of the country. Norwester or Kalbaishakhi
is a characteristic feature of summer, This storm occurs in great intensity with
thunder and lightning from north western direction during March-April. With high
wind velocity, this storm causes severe damage.Summer rainfall is good for crop
production. Rainfall, specially in summer, is very much useful for growing paddy, jute

2025
2025

Geographical Description of Bangladesh

163

and sugercane. On the other hand, in winter, south-east monsoon causes chill which is
very useful for the growth of wheat and cereals (green crops). These type of crops are
very profitable for the farmers.

Task : Mention the cultivation of crops on the basis of season and environment.

Summer season | Rainy season

Winter season

Task: What type of safety and security

thunderstorm and lightning?

measures Should be taken m case of

Security measures Safety measures

Exercise

Multiple choices questions

1.

Where is the Lalmai hills located?

a. Gazipur b. Tangail
c. Mymensingh d. Cumilla
Causes of river deposition in Bangladesh —

1. deposition of soluble matter in the water,

ii, destruction of forest in the coastal area.

ii. construction of planned dam on the river banks.
Which one of the following is correct?

a. iandii b. Land iii

c. itand ii d. i,tand ii
164 Geography and Environment

Provide answer to the question number 3 and 4 on the information given below.

Region Average height (metre) Plants
P 244 Telsur, Bamboo
Q 30 Gajari, Koroi_ |
R 21 Sal, Hizal

3. Where is the *P’ region in Bangladesh?
a. Tangail -Mymensingh b. Moulvibazar — Habiganj
ce. Rangpur — Dinajpur d. Noakhali — Cumilla
4. The Common feature between ‘Q’ and ‘R’ regions displayed in the table —
i, soil,
i. characteristics of plants.
ii. latitude and longitude.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b, i and iii
ce. liand iil d. 1. ii, and in

5. Where do Padma, Jamuna and Meghna rivers of Bangladesh have joined

together ?
a. Daulatdia b. Chandpur
c. Jashore d. Kushtia

6. What is the average annual temperature of Bangladesh?
a. 26.01° Celsius b, 26.09° Celsius
c. 27.01° Celsius d. 28,09° Celsius
7. What is the warmest month of Bangladesh?
a. July b. June
c. April d. March

2025
2025

Geographical Desenption of Bangladesh 165

Creative questions

a” ay

BANGLADESH ,,

4"
O 32 4 Kilometres {
it
Pom

INDIA

a. Whatis the name of highest peak in Bangladesh?
b. Describe the Madhupur Tract.
c. Deseribe the physiography of “P’ marked areas im the Map.

d. Is there any similarity between ‘Q’ and ‘R’ marked places? Explain with
reference to your answer.

A group of student went on a study tour to the south-eastern region. There they
saw anver used for producing energy using its current.

a. The Dhaleshwani is the tibutary of which river?
b. Explain the reason of norwester,
c. Deseribe the river curent seen by the students,

d. Analyze the importance of the above mentioned river in the economy of
Bangladesh.
