CHAPTER FIVE
Legal Aspects of Business

Everyone has the nght to do any kind of business to earn a living and to make
profit. But, every business has to be permitted and legal as per law of the state.
In this chapter we shall learn about the legal aspects of business such as
licensing, Trade Marks, Franchise etc.

S

Afte

ay

Department of Patents, Designs and Trademarks (DPDT)

og
Ce

r completion of this chapter we shall be able to —
Explain the legal aspect of Business
Deseribe the Concept of License and how to get it.
Describe the concept of Franchise and how to get it.
Describe the concept of Patent, Registration and its advantages
Explain the concept and type of Trade mark
Explain chronologically the steps for registration of Trade Mark
Explain the concept of Copy Right and registration process
Describe the advantages of registration of Copy Right
Explain about BSTI

Explain the concept and necessities of Insurance

2025

Explain the types of Insurance and process of insurance
2025

Legal Aspects of Business 7

Legal Aspects of Business

Since 1998, the Business Entrepreneurship course has been included in the
secondary level as an elective course in the commerce group. A teacher from
Commerce Faculty of the University of Dhaka wrote and marketed the book.
The students of this subject had been waiting for this book. As a result, the third
edition of 8000 copies of this book was sold out immediately after publishing. In
fourth edition only 4000 copies of this book had been published, but surprisingly
sales were nearly stopped. Afler searching the reason it was found that copy of
the book at a comparatively less price was sold in the market. Finding no other
way, the teacher went to the nearby police station. Police asked him about the
copy nght of the book, whether it was registered. Though the writer was aware
of the necessity of registration of copy right, ignormg the importance of
registration of copy right, he abstained from doing it. Police regretted of their
inability to do anything in favor of him. Consequently the teacher incurred loss
financially and lost interest to republish the book.

What have you understood reading the above story?

If the writer would have registered the copy right of the book, he could be saved
from the financial loss. Business entrepreneurs have some intellectual property
such as copy right, patent, trade mark etc. They are the result of research in
business entrepreneurship and invaluable asset of business. To protect and
preserve these assets all ihe countries have legal bindings. The entrepreneurs
must have primary knowledge about these assets and the related law. Legal
concepts help the entrepreneurs to be protected from the legal problems of the
business.

1. License

To start any kind of business, approval should be taken or be registered from the
respective auihority. Approval or registration process varies depending upon the
nature of business. In case of sole proprietorship business, if it is within the city
corporation, trade license should be collected from the corporation authority and
if it is outside of the city corporation, license to be collected from the district
administration. In our country registration of partnership business is not manda-
tory. But, if the partners want they can apply to the registrar for registration
following a particular procedure. Such application must be accompanied by
particular fees.
72 Business Entrepreneurship

Registration of Joint Stock Companies

As per company Act, registration of joint stock companies in Bangladesh is
mandatory. In this case, registration is done by the registrar of the Joint Stock
Companies. The originators apply to the registrar along with other related
documents and specific fees, The registrar issues certificate if he finds all the
submitted documents satisfactory after detailed scrutiny. The company gets life
after having the registration. For registration application of the private limited
company there should be at least two originators and public limited company it
should be seven, Private limited company can start business after having the
registration certificate, but the public limited companies have to collect business
commencement certificate to start the business.

2. Franchising

BAND BOX tf (ZZ
- Pipatr :

At present, business established and operated under franchising has got
popularity, The right of using the name of a reputed business firm and making,
selling and distributing its products is called Franchising. Band Box. Pizza Hut,
KFC, Wimpi, Kentaki, ete are the example of this type of business. There are
two parties in franchising: Franchisor and Franchisee. For example we can say
that the KFC of America is the Franchisor and Transcom Limited in Bangladesh
is the Franchisee, The main features of Franchising are:

1) Deed of Agreement between Franchisor and Franchisee
2) Branded Products or Service

3) Monitoring by the Franchisor to ensure the product quality and process
at the accepted level,

The Franchise Agreement

Franchising Agreement is the main element of franchising business which is
executed between the Franchisor and Franchisee. The clauses of the deed of
agreement may vary on the basis of amount of capital, training arrangement,
management help. etc. Franchising area is also very important. But, the
following issues are very common in most of franchising agreement:

2025
Legal Aspects of Business ce

a) Franchisee has to pay a particular amount of fee initially and pays a
specified amount of monthly fee. In return, the franchisee gets right to sale
products of the Franchisor as per day.

b) Franchisee must agree to invest required amount of investment.

c) Both the parties shall have the objective to earn money from the business.
Profit is the yardstick for the success of business. The management should
be efficient and goods and services need to be of better quality to be successful.

d) Franchisor starts to earn from the day of receiving fees. In some cases,
franchisor can demand for the fee before allowing the franchising.

€) As per agreement, the franchisor may keep the right to place selection,
infrastructure development and ownership of these things to him.

f) Ifthe business is not to satisfactory level of the franchisor, he can cancel the
agreement.

g) Franchisee can sell only those items which are acceptable to Franchisor.

If the contents of the deed of agreement are acceptable to both the parties,
then they can sign it.

Franchising business can be operated on the basis of legal bindings in
Bangladesh through registration. For example, if the company is a private
limited company then it can start business in Bangladesh through registration
from the registrar of the joint stock companies.

There are many advantages of doing business through Franchising . Such as,
marketing of branded products, training of workers, getting business related
advice from the franchisor and having arrangement of financing facility. Among
the disadvantages, tight monitoring, probability of cancellation of agreement on
breaching of any terms or clause of the contract and requirement of large amount
of investment etc. are mentionable. Though having the difficulties, franchising
has been assisting in developing and setting new businesses. In many foreign
countries. franchising has gained vast popularity, but it is still not very much
popular and well known in Bangladesh. Gradually, it will become popular, if the
branches are increased in the district level along with the big cities.

1, Intellectual Properties

Works created from creativity and intellectuality is Intellectual Property.
Inventions applicable to business, industry or commerce, Arts and literature,
design, symbol, name etc. are included in intellectual property. The intellectual

Business Entreprenewship, Class 9-10, Forma-10
74 Business Entrepreneurship

properties of an entrepreneur are those which have been invented with a long
time effort. Intellectual properties are results of all the invention and creative
works. Using the intellectual properties, human being has discovered many
mystery of the creation. Intellectual properties have made knowing the
impossible possible. Among this properties. Patent, Trade Mark and Copy right
are mentionable. Intellectual Property Day on 26th of April is observed every
year in Bangladesh along with the world.

2. Patents:

Patent is one kind of Intellectual Property. With the help of patent, the inventor
is given a monopoly ownership over his invention for a certain period of time. In
this case, an agreement is signed between the inventor and the government.
Giving Patent to the inventor means that anybody cannot make it, use it or sell it
for a particular period of time. Sometimes, the dishonest business people or
competitors may duplicate the products in the market and the original inventors
may incur financial loss. The main objective of Patent is to protect the
entrepreneurs’ invention so that nobody can duplicate the product to gain
financial benefit from making and selling it to the market. In the business world,
in the past many genuine inventors had incurred financial loss in this way. As a
result the concept of patent evolved. However, because of entrepreneur's lack of
awareness and ignorance, they have been cheated many times. In Bangladesh,
we have been following the Patent and Design Law of 1911.

3. Trade Mark

Trade Mark is used to differentiate products in trade from other same and
identical products. In the similar way, incase of service it is called the Service
Mark. The main objective of the mark or symbol is sell identity. Device, Brand,
Heading, Label, Ticket, Name, Signature, Word, Letter, Symbol, Numbers
added things, Mix of color, or any combination of these at any form will be
included in Trade Mark. Packing is not included in the Trade Mark.

Trademark: ll Fs |
Registered Trademark: GD)

20235
2025

Legal Aspects of Business 75

Necessity of Trade Mark Registration

Registered Trade Mark gives the owner sole ownership or entitlement to use the
mark exclusively. Without the permission of the registered owner, nobody can
use the mark. If the registered mark is renowned, the owner shall enjoy his
ownership on all the products having the marks. And the mark is protected under
the law. If the rights are breached, the owner can sue against to protect his

rights.

Time-limit of Trade Mark Registration

The owner of the registered trade mark reserves the exclusive right to use the
mat, This registration is given for seven years initially. It can be renewed for
ten years. if application is made before the expiry. Registration can be renewed
again and again for an uncertain period of time. If any agreement is breached or
any complaint is proved, the registration can be cancelled if it is not renewed in
time. In this Sub-continent Trade Mark act has been introduced in 1940. In
Bangladesh, at present we are following Trade Mark Act 2009.

4, Copyright:

Copyright is another significant intellectual property, which if not protected can
cause huge loss to the owner or its entitled person. Exclusive entitlement is given
on the use of literature, arts and culture to its creator with the help of Copyright.
Literature including Story, Drama, Essay. Poem, etc. Paintings, Film, Music,
Instrumental Music, Sculpture Art are also preserved by Copyright. Presently,
computer software is also protected by Copyright. For example, we can say that
when an agreement is signed between the writer and the publisher for publishing
and marketing of the book it is called Copyright agreement. In the agreement
period and amount of royalty etc. are mentioned. If the deed of agreement is
registered then the writer can take protection from the court for any breach of
conditions and terms. Branded products, Sports, Name of film stars can be
distributed through Copyright agreement. Actually, Copynght agreement is a
popular medium for distribution of products and services, Copyright Act was
actually introduced in 1912 in this Sub-continent. Bangladesh has Copyright Act
in 2000 and which was amended in 2005. Ifthe ways for protection of Copyright
is properly followed, business entrepreneurs can be safeguarded from their loss
in most of the cases. As per Copyright Act 2008, the mght of the artist is
preserved till 60 years after the death of the artist along with his/her life ime.
76 Business Entrepreneurship

5. Bangladesh Standards and Testing Institutions- BSTI

For producing and marketing a product it is necessary to register the symbol of
a product to separate it from other similar products that are bought and sold in
the market, Bangladesh Standard and Testing Institution is responsible for this
job, It is an organization under the ministry of Industry. For registration of
trademark of a product, application to be submitted on prescribed form along
with specified fees. Moreover, to ascertain the quality of some products,
certificate to be obtained madatorily from BSTI after production of those
products as per standards. BST] mandatorily maintains a list of products
certificated by them. In any case, if the quality is not maintained to the
predefined standard, their certificate may be cancelled. There are some products
which have mandatorily maintained standard under BSTI certification and
quality of these products can be ensured from BSTT. To maintain the quality of
products, BST] extends necessary assistance in this regards.

6. Insurance

The probability of loss in a business for any reason is called business risk.
Without risk there is no business. Business enterprises can face risk; due to
natural or unnatural reasons, Storm, flood, cyclone and excessive rain are major
natural risk, Besides, business enterprises can face huge damage because of
burglary, snatching, fire, marine, rail and motor accidents. Insurance is a better
way to reduce this sort of risks. Insurance is also a business.

When any business organization agrees to make payment of a particular sum of
money for loss caused by any predefined incident or for occurrence of the
specified incident against payment of particular premium is called Insurance
Contract. The party who agrees to compensate or make payment of the particular
amount of money is called Insurer’, on the other hand: the party who is being
compensated is called the Insured’. As per agreement the insured gives the
insurer a certain amount of money at a time or regular installment based which
is called ‘Premium’. The deed of insurance agreement is called Insurance Cover
Note which includes all the details of terms and condition between the parties.
Insurance is called the contract of compensation. But, life insurance is an
exception in this case,

Insurance System is also exists in Bangladesh like other countries. In our
country, we had been following the Insurance Act 1938 which had been
introduced in the subcontinent. Later, m 2010 the Act has been changed,
modified and amended and a new law has been enforced which is known as
Insurance Act 2010.

£023
2025

Legal Aspects of Business 7

Necessity of Insurance in Business

Assessing the risk in business is an important task for an entrepreneur. There are
many risk associated with production and distribution process. A business firm
may face difficulties and financial loss at any time due to supernatural loss, theft,
workers sickness, accident. fire. and sinking of vessel. The insurance
organizations compensate the insured against the above mentioned losses in
exchange of premium as per insurance agreement. For this reason, msurance is
very much helpful for a business. As a result, in absence of the insurance service
many entrepreneurs would have to leave the business at the primary stage
because of probable risk inherited in the business. So, it is necessary to have the
assistance of insurance to smoothly run the business by removing the
stipulations of risk and prevailing uncertainty in the business.

Classification of Insurance

At present, there are many types of Insurance. Among them four types are the
most popular:

1. Life Insurance

2. Marine Insurance

3. Fire Insurance

4. Accident Insurance
Having the benefit of insurance, at present many types of insurance have been
evolved in the market, such as: Insurance for Burglary, Trust, Riot, Strike,
Earthquake, Liabilities, Motor Car, and Crop etc. Some of them are discussed
below:

Life Insurance

Life msurance is the most popular among all the insurance business. The
Insurance Policy which gives the insured or any nominated person a certain sum
of money (insured amount) by the insurer against insurance premium after a
certain period of time or death of the person nominated is called life insurance.
Life of human being is the subject matter of this msurance. Since, life can not be
compensated; it can not be called the contract of compensation like all other

insurance contract,
VAteo ~
PoOVwss
78 Business Entrepreneurship

Fire Insurance

The insurance policy which gives the compensation against losses caused by
fire is called Fire Insurance. Generally, Fire Insurance Policy is taken to
protect Goods, Houses, Warehouse, Factories and Machineries from fire.

Marine Insurance

The Insurance policy which gives protection from the risk associated with river
journey and sea voyage is called Marine Insurance. A major part of the world
business is done through water ways. To avoid the risk related to water ways,
such as Storm, Tsunami, Pirates, War etc. marine insurance can be taken.

Pn

Accident Insurance

Insurance for Life and the risk of destruction of asset of a person are included in
the Accident Insurance. In this kind of policy, as per terms of the policy the
insurer pays compensation for particular insurance premium to the insured for
any loss against the probable accident.

2025
2025

Legal Aspects of Business 79

Besides, the above mentioned legal aspects of business, there are some
additional laws; knowledge of which gives the entrepreneur more feasibility to
run his business smoothly. Specially, knowledge on Worker Reeruitment Law,
Factory Law, Risk Mitigation Law in Business, Banking Law are helpful to run
business positively.

EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question

1. What ts the main characteristic of Franchising?
a. Manufacturing b. Marketing
c. Making Profit d. Agreement
2, Why Trade Mark of goods in business is registered?
a. To establish right of the owner —b. To expand the market of the product
c. To avoid risk d. To face the competition

Read the following paragraph and answer the question No. 3 & 4:

Mr. Habib of Shanir Akhra, in Dhaka is the owner of a factory of manufacturing
electronic goods. Besides, he imports various electronic goods through a
supplying company from abroad. The supplying company delivers the goods to

the Chattogram Sea Port, Bangladesh. To avoid the risk of transporting the goods,
an insurance policy is taken.
a0 Business Entrepreneurship

3, Who will be the insured in the above mentioned paragraph?
a. Manufacturer b, Supplier
c,. Importer d. Port Authority
4, Insuring the mentioned business —
i. Particular risk shall be eliminated
ii. Accident on the sea shall reduce
iii, There will be certainty of being compensated,

Which one of the following is correct:
a. 1] & Il b. 1 & Ill
c. W& I d. 1, I & Hl

Creative Question

1. Ismam came to Dhaka from Hatia after his final exam. He along with his
college going cousin visited many places like National Zoo, Novo Theatre,
National Museum, etc. Ismam noticed that his cousin takes him to restaurant
with the same name at different places. Asking the reason he came to know that
it is a foreign restaurant. All the big cities in Bangladesh have its branch. But,
this kind of business has not gained popularity in Bangladesh yet.

a. Trade Mark Act of which year is being followed in Bangladesh?

b. What do you understand by Copyright? Explain

¢. What kind of business is it as mentioned in paragraph? Explain.

d. Give your opinion to make this type of business more popular.

2. Mr. Shabuz is an inventor. After long research, he invented such a kind of
solar power based machine for irrigation which is different from all the
contemporary machineries. It took first place at the National Science Fair. He
started commercial production and got huge response from the market. Very
shortly, another established company duplicated his product in the market. But,
he failed to take any action against the company after filing suit.

a. What is the minimum number for entrepreneur for a private limited company?
b. What do you understand by license? Explain.

c. What kind of asset is the irrigation pump of Mr. Shabuz? Expain.

2025

d. Explain the reasons of Mr. Shabuz not having any legal support.
